REBECCA AND ROWENA.

A ROMANCE UPON ROMANCE.

BY MR. MICHAEL ANGELO TITMARSH.


CHAPTER I.

THE OVERTURE.--COMMENCEMENT OF THE BUSINESS.


Well-beloved novel-readers and gentle patronesses of romance, assuredly
it has often occurred to every one of you, that the books we delight
in have very unsatisfactory conclusions, and end quite prematurely with
page 320 of the third volume. At that epoch of the history it is well
known that the hero is seldom more than thirty years old, and the
heroine by consequence some seven or eight years younger; and I would
ask any of you whether it is fair to suppose that people after the above
age have nothing worthy of note in their lives, and cease to exist as
they drive away from Saint George’s, Hanover Square? You, dear young
ladies, who get your knowledge of life from the circulating library, may
be led to imagine that when the marriage business is done, and Emilia
is whisked off in the new travelling-carriage, by the side of the
enraptured Earl; or Belinda, breaking away from the tearful embraces
of her excellent mother, dries her own lovely eyes upon the throbbing
waistcoat of her bridegroom--you may be apt, I say, to suppose that all
is over then; that Emilia and the Earl are going to be happy for the
rest of their lives in his lordship’s romantic castle in the North, and
Belinda and her young clergyman to enjoy uninterrupted bliss in their
rose-trellised parsonage in the West of England: but some there be among
the novel-reading classes--old experienced folks--who know better than
this. Some there be who have been married, and found that they have
still something to see and to do, and to suffer mayhap; and that
adventures, and pains, and pleasures, and taxes, and sunrises and
settings, and the business and joys and griefs of life go on after, as
before the nuptial ceremony.

Therefore I say, it is an unfair advantage which the novelist takes of
hero and heroine, as of his inexperienced reader, to say good-by to the
two former, as soon as ever they are made husband and wife; and I have
often wished that additions should be made to all works of fiction which
have been brought to abrupt terminations in the manner described; and
that we should hear what occurs to the sober married man, as well as to
the ardent bachelor; to the matron, as well as to the blushing spinster.
And in this respect I admire (and would desire to imitate,) the noble
and prolific French author, Alexandre Dumas, who carries his heroes from
early youth down to the most venerable old age; and does not let them
rest until they are so old, that it is full time the poor fellows should
get a little peace and quiet. A hero is much too valuable a gentleman to
be put upon the retired list, in the prime and vigor of his youth; and
I wish to know what lady among us would like to be put on the shelf, and
thought no longer interesting, because she has a family growing up, and
is four or five and thirty years of age? I have known ladies at sixty,
with hearts as tender and ideas as romantic as any young misses of
sixteen. Let us have middle-aged novels then, as well as your extremely
juvenile legends: let the young ones be warned that the old folks have
a right to be interesting: and that a lady may continue to have a heart,
although she is somewhat stouter than she was when a school-girl, and a
man his feelings, although he gets his hair from Truefitt’s.

Thus I would desire that the biographies of many of our most illustrious
personages of romance should be continued by fitting hands, and that
they should be heard of, until at least a decent age.--Look at Mr.
James’s heroes: they invariably marry young. Look at Mr. Dickens’s:
they disappear from the scene when they are mere chits. I trust these
authors, who are still alive, will see the propriety of telling us
something more about people in whom we took a considerable interest,
and who must be at present strong and hearty, and in the full vigor
of health and intellect. And in the tales of the great Sir Walter (may
honor be to his name), I am sure there are a number of people who are
untimely carried away from us, and of whom we ought to hear more.

My dear Rebecca, daughter of Isaac of York, has always, in my mind, been
one of these; nor can I ever believe that such a woman, so admirable, so
tender, so heroic, so beautiful, could disappear altogether before such
another woman as Rowena, that vapid, flaxen-headed creature, who is,
in my humble opinion, unworthy of Ivanhoe, and unworthy of her place as
heroine. Had both of them got their rights, it ever seemed to me that
Rebecca would have had the husband, and Rowena would have gone off to
a convent and shut herself up, where I, for one, would never have taken
the trouble of inquiring for her.

But after all she married Ivanhoe. What is to be done? There is no help
for it. There it is in black and white at the end of the third volume
of Sir Walter Scott’s chronicle, that the couple were joined together in
matrimony. And must the Disinherited Knight, whose blood has been fired
by the suns of Palestine, and whose heart has been warmed in the company
of the tender and beautiful Rebecca, sit down contented for life by the
side of such a frigid piece of propriety as that icy, faultless, prim,
niminy-piminy Rowena? Forbid it fate, forbid it poetical justice! There
is a simple plan for setting matters right, and giving all parties their
due, which is here submitted to the novel-reader. Ivanhoe’s history MUST
have had a continuation; and it is this which ensues. I may be wrong in
some particulars of the narrative,--as what writer will not be?--but
of the main incidents of the history, I have in my own mind no sort of
doubt, and confidently submit them to that generous public which likes
to see virtue righted, true love rewarded, and the brilliant Fairy
descend out of the blazing chariot at the end of the pantomime, and make
Harlequin and Columbine happy. What, if reality be not so, gentlemen and
ladies; and if, after dancing a variety of jigs and antics, and jumping
in and out of endless trap-doors and windows, through life’s shifting
scenes, no fairy comes down to make US comfortable at the close of the
performance? Ah! let us give our honest novel-folks the benefit of their
position, and not be envious of their good luck.

No person who has read the preceding volumes of this history, as the
famous chronicler of Abbotsford has recorded them, can doubt for a
moment what was the result of the marriage between Sir Wilfrid of
Ivanhoe and Lady Rowena. Those who have marked her conduct during
her maidenhood, her distinguished politeness, her spotless modesty of
demeanor, her unalterable coolness under all circumstances, and her
lofty and gentlewomanlike bearing, must be sure that her married conduct
would equal her spinster behavior, and that Rowena the wife would be a
pattern of correctness for all the matrons of England.

Such was the fact. For miles around Rotherwood her character for piety
was known. Her castle was a rendezvous for all the clergy and monks of
the district, whom she fed with the richest viands, while she pinched
herself upon pulse and water. There was not an invalid in the three
Ridings, Saxon or Norman, but the palfrey of the Lady Rowena might
be seen journeying to his door, in company with Father Glauber, her
almoner, and Brother Thomas of Epsom, her leech. She lighted up all the
churches in Yorkshire with wax-candles, the offerings of her piety. The
bells of her chapel began to ring at two o’clock in the morning; and
all the domestics of Rotherwood were called upon to attend at matins,
at complins, at nones, at vespers, and at sermon. I need not say that
fasting was observed with all the rigors of the Church; and that those
of the servants of the Lady Rowena were looked upon with most favor
whose hair-shirts were the roughest, and who flagellated themselves with
the most becoming perseverance.

Whether it was that this discipline cleared poor Wamba’s wits or cooled
his humor, it is certain that he became the most melancholy fool in
England, and if ever he ventured upon a pun to the shuddering poor
servitors, who were mumbling their dry crusts below the salt, it was
such a faint and stale joke that noboby dared to laugh at the innuendoes
of the unfortunate wag, and a sickly smile was the best applause he
could muster. Once, indeed, when Guffo, the goose-boy (a half-witted
poor wretch), laughed outright at a lamentably stale pun which Wamba
palmed upon him at supper-time, (it was dark, and the torches being
brought in, Wamba said, “Guffo, they can’t see their way in the
argument, and are going TO THROW A LITTLE LIGHT UPON THE SUBJECT,”) the
Lady Rowena, being disturbed in a theological controversy with Father
Willibald, (afterwards canonized as St. Willibald, of Bareacres, hermit
and confessor,) called out to know what was the cause of the unseemly
interruption, and Guffo and Wamba being pointed out as the culprits,
ordered them straightway into the court-yard, and three dozen to be
administered to each of them.

“I got you out of Front-de-Boeufs castle,” said poor Wamba, piteously,
appealing to Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, “and canst thou not save me from
the lash?”

“Yes, from Front-de-Boeuf’s castle, WHERE YOU WERE LOCKED UP WITH THE
JEWESS IN THE TOWER!” said Rowena, haughtily replying to the timid
appeal of her husband. “Gurth, give him four dozen!”

And this was all poor Wamba got by applying for the mediation of his
master.

In fact, Rowena knew her own dignity so well as a princess of the
royal blood of England, that Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, her consort, could
scarcely call his life his own, and was made, in all things, to feel the
inferiority of his station. And which of us is there acquainted with the
sex that has not remarked this propensity in lovely woman, and how often
the wisest in the council are made to be as fools at HER board, and the
boldest in the battle-field are craven when facing her distaff?

“Where you were locked up with the Jewess in the tower,” was a
remark, too, of which Wilfrid keenly felt, and perhaps the reader will
understand, the significancy. When the daughter of Isaac of York brought
her diamonds and rubies--the poor gentle victim!--and, meekly laying
them at the feet of the conquering Rowena, departed into foreign lands
to tend the sick of her people, and to brood over the bootless passion
which consumed her own pure heart, one would have thought that the heart
of the royal lady would have melted before such beauty and humility, and
that she would have been generous in the moment of her victory.

But did you ever know a right-minded woman pardon another for being
handsome and more love-worthy than herself? The Lady Rowena did
certainly say with mighty magnanimity to the Jewish maiden, “Come and
live with me as a sister,” as the former part of this history shows; but
Rebecca knew in her heart that her ladyship’s proposition was what
is called BOSH (in that noble Eastern language with which Wilfrid the
Crusader was familiar), or fudge, in plain Saxon; and retired with a
broken, gentle spirit, neither able to bear the sight of her rival’s
happiness, nor willing to disturb it by the contrast of her own
wretchedness. Rowena, like the most high-bred and virtuous of women,
never forgave Isaac’s daughter her beauty, nor her flirtation with
Wilfrid (as the Saxon lady chose to term it); nor, above all, her
admirable diamonds and jewels, although Rowena was actually in
possession of them.

In a word, she was always flinging Rebecca into Ivanhoe’s teeth. There
was not a day in his life but that unhappy warrior was made to remember
that a Hebrew damsel had been in love with him, and that a Christian
lady of fashion could never forgive the insult. For instance, if Gurth,
the swineherd, who was now promoted to be a gamekeeper and verderer,
brought the account of a famous wild-boar in the wood, and proposed a
hunt, Rowena would say, “Do, Sir Wilfrid, persecute these poor pigs: you
know your friends the Jews can’t abide them!” Or when, as it oft would
happen, our lion-hearted monarch, Richard, in order to get a loan or a
benevolence from the Jews, would roast a few of the Hebrew capitalists,
or extract some of the principal rabbis’ teeth, Rowena would exult and
say, “Serve them right, the misbelieving wretches! England can never be
a happy country until every one of these monsters is exterminated!” or
else, adopting a strain of still more savage sarcasm, would exclaim,
“Ivanhoe my dear, more persecution for the Jews! Hadn’t you better
interfere, my love? His Majesty will do anything for you; and, you know,
the Jews were ALWAYS SUCH FAVORITES OF YOURS,” or words to that effect.
But, nevertheless, her ladyship never lost an opportunity of wearing
Rebecca’s jewels at court, whenever the Queen held a drawing-room; or
at the York assizes and ball, when she appeared there: not of course
because she took any interest in such things, but because she considered
it her duty to attend, as one of the chief ladies of the county.

Thus Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, having attained the height of his wishes,
was, like many a man when he has reached that dangerous elevation,
disappointed. Ah, dear friends, it is but too often so in life! Many a
garden, seen from a distance, looks fresh and green, which, when
beheld closely, is dismal and weedy; the shady walks melancholy and
grass-grown; the bowers you would fain repose in, cushioned with
stinging-nettles. I have ridden in a caique upon the waters of the
Bosphorus, and looked upon the capital of the Soldan of Turkey. As seen
from those blue waters, with palace and pinnacle, with gilded dome and
towering cypress, it seemeth a very Paradise of Mahound: but, enter
the city, and it is but a beggarly labyrinth of rickety huts and dirty
alleys, where the ways are steep and the smells are foul, tenanted by
mangy dogs and ragged beggars--a dismal illusion! Life is such, ah,
well-a-day! It is only hope which is real, and reality is a bitterness
and a deceit.

Perhaps a man with Ivanhoe’s high principles would never bring himself
to acknowledge this fact; but others did for him. He grew thin, and
pined away as much as if he had been in a fever under the scorching sun
of Ascalon. He had no appetite for his meals; he slept ill, though he
was yawning all day. The jangling of the doctors and friars whom
Rowena brought together did not in the least enliven him, and he would
sometimes give proofs of somnolency during their disputes, greatly to
the consternation of his lady. He hunted a good deal, and, I very much
fear, as Rowena rightly remarked, that he might have an excuse for being
absent from home. He began to like wine, too, who had been as sober as a
hermit; and when he came back from Athelstane’s (whither he would
repair not unfrequently), the unsteadiness of his gait and the unnatural
brilliancy of his eye were remarked by his lady: who, you may be sure,
was sitting up for him. As for Athelstane, he swore by St. Wullstan that
he was glad to have escaped a marriage with such a pattern of propriety;
and honest Cedric the Saxon (who had been very speedily driven out of
his daughter-in-law’s castle) vowed by St. Waltheof that his son had
bought a dear bargain.

So Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe became almost as tired of England as his royal
master Richard was, (who always quitted the country when he had squeezed
from his loyal nobles, commons, clergy, and Jews, all the money which he
could get,) and when the lion-hearted Prince began to make war against
the French King, in Normandy and Guienne, Sir Wilfrid pined like a true
servant to be in company of the good champion, alongside of whom he
had shivered so many lances, and dealt such woundy blows of sword and
battle-axe on the plains of Jaffa or the breaches of Acre. Travellers
were welcome at Rotherwood that brought news from the camp of the good
King: and I warrant me that the knight listened with all his might when
Father Drono, the chaplain, read in the St. James’s Chronykyll (which
was the paper of news he of Ivanhoe took in) of “another glorious
triumph”--“Defeat of the French near Blois”--“Splendid victory at Epte,
and narrow escape of the French King:” the which deeds of arms the
learned scribes had to narrate.

However such tales might excite him during the reading, they left the
Knight of Ivanhoe only the more melancholy after listening: and the more
moody as he sat in his great hall silently draining his Gascony wine.
Silently sat he and looked at his coats-of-mail hanging vacant on the
wall, his banner covered with spider-webs, and his sword and axe rusting
there. “Ah, dear axe,” sighed he (into his drinking-horn)--“ah, gentle
steel! that was a merry time when I sent thee crashing into the pate of
the Emir Abdul Melik as he rode on the right of Saladin. Ah, my sword,
my dainty headsman? my sweet split-rib? my razor of infidel beards! is
the rust to eat thine edge off, and am I never more to wield thee in
battle? What is the use of a shield on a wall, or a lance that has a
cobweb for a pennon? O Richard, my good king, would I could hear once
more thy voice in the front of the onset! Bones of Brian the Templar?
would ye could rise from your grave at Templestowe, and that we might
break another spear for honor and--and--” . . .

“And REBECCA,” he would have said; but the knight paused here in rather
a guilty panic: and her Royal Highness the Princess Rowena (as she chose
to style herself at home) looked so hard at him out of her china-blue
eyes, that Sir Wilfrid felt as if she was reading his thoughts, and was
fain to drop his own eyes into his flagon.

In a word, his life was intolerable. The dinner hour of the twelfth
century, it is known, was very early; in fact, people dined at ten
o’clock in the morning: and after dinner Rowena sat mum under her
canopy, embroidered with the arms of Edward the Confessor, working with
her maidens at the most hideous pieces of tapestry, representing the
tortures and martyrdoms of her favorite saints, and not allowing a soul
to speak above his breath, except when she chose to cry out in her own
shrill voice when a handmaid made a wrong stitch, or let fall a ball of
worsted. It was a dreary life. Wamba, we have said, never ventured to
crack a joke, save in a whisper, when he was ten miles from home; and
then Sir Wilfrid Ivanhoe was too weary and blue-devilled to laugh; but
hunted in silence, moodily bringing down deer and wild-boar with shaft
and quarrel.

Then he besought Robin of Huntingdon, the jolly outlaw, nathless, to
join him, and go to the help of their fair sire King Richard, with a
score or two of lances. But the Earl of Huntingdon was a very different
character from Robin Hood the forester. There was no more conscientious
magistrate in all the county than his lordship: he was never known to
miss church or quarter-sessions; he was the strictest game-proprietor
in all the Riding, and sent scores of poachers to Botany Bay. “A man who
has a stake in the country, my good Sir Wilfrid,” Lord Huntingdon said,
with rather a patronizing air (his lordship had grown immensely fat
since the King had taken him into grace, and required a horse as strong
as an elephant to mount him)--“a man with a stake in the country
ought to stay IN the country. Property has its duties as well as its
privileges, and a person of my rank is bound to live on the land from
which he gets his living.”

“‘Amen!” sang out the Reverend ---- Tuck, his lordship’s domestic
chaplain, who had also grown as sleek as the Abbot of Jorvaulx, who was
as prim as a lady in his dress, wore bergamot in his handkerchief, and
had his poll shaved and his beard curled every day. And so sanctified
was his Reverence grown, that he thought it was a shame to kill the
pretty deer, (though he ate of them still hugely, both in pasties and
with French beans and currant-jelly,) and being shown a quarter-staff
upon a certain occasion, handled it curiously, and asked “what that ugly
great stick was?”

Lady Huntingdon, late Maid Marian, had still some of her old fun and
spirits, and poor Ivanhoe begged and prayed that she would come and
stay at Rotherwood occasionally, and egayer the general dulness of that
castle. But her ladyship said that Rowena gave herself such airs, and
bored her so intolerably with stories of King Edward the Confessor, that
she preferred any place rather than Rotherwood, which was as dull as if
it had been at the top of Mount Athos.

The only person who visited it was Athelstane. “His Royal Highness the
Prince” Rowena of course called him, whom the lady received with
royal honors. She had the guns fired, and the footmen turned out with
presented arms when he arrived; helped him to all Ivanhoe’s favorite
cuts of the mutton or the turkey, and forced her poor husband to
light him to the state bedroom, walking backwards, holding a pair of
wax-candles. At this hour of bedtime the Thane used to be in such a
condition, that he saw two pair of candles and two Ivanhoes reeling
before him. Let us hope it was not Ivanhoe that was reeling, but only
his kinsman’s brains muddled with the quantities of drink which it was
his daily custom to consume. Rowena said it was the crack which the
wicked Bois Guilbert, “the Jewess’s OTHER lover, Wilfrid my dear,”
 gave him on his royal skull, which caused the Prince to be disturbed so
easily; but added, that drinking became a person of royal blood, and was
but one of the duties of his station.

Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe saw it would be of no avail to ask this man to
bear him company on his projected tour abroad; but still he himself was
every day more and more bent upon going, and he long cast about for some
means of breaking to his Rowena his firm resolution to join the King.
He thought she would certainty fall ill if he communicated the news too
abruptly to her: he would pretend a journey to York to attend a grand
jury; then a call to London on law business or to buy stock; then he
would slip over to Calais by the packet, by degrees as it were; and
so be with the King before his wife knew that he was out of sight of
Westminster Hall.

“Suppose your honor says you are going as your honor would say Bo! to a
goose, plump, short, and to the point,” said Wamba the Jester--who was
Sir Wilfrid’s chief counsellor and attendant--“depend on’t her Highness
would bear the news like a Christian woman.”

“Tush, malapert! I will give thee the strap,” said Sir Wilfrid, in a
fine tone of high-tragedy indignation. “Thou knowest not the delicacy
of the nerves of high-born ladies. An she faint not, write me down
Hollander.”

“I will wager my bauble against an Irish billet of exchange that she
will let your honor go off readily: that is, if you press not the matter
too strongly,” Wamba answered, knowingly. And this Ivanhoe found to his
discomfiture: for one morning at breakfast, adopting a degage air, as he
sipped his tea, he said, “My love, I was thinking of going over to pay
his Majesty a visit in Normandy.” Upon which, laying down her muffin,
(which, since the royal Alfred baked those cakes, had been the chosen
breakfast cate of noble Anglo-Saxons, and which a kneeling page tendered
to her on a salver, chased by the Florentine, Benvenuto Cellini,)--“When
do you think of going, Wilfrid my dear?” the lady said; and the moment
the tea-things were removed, and the tables and their trestles put away,
she set about mending his linen, and getting ready his carpet-bag.

So Sir Wilfrid was as disgusted at her readiness to part with him as he
had been weary of staying at home, which caused Wamba the Fool to say,
“Marry, gossip, thou art like the man on ship-board, who, when the
boatswain flogged him, did cry out ‘Oh!’ wherever the rope’s-end fell on
him: which caused Master Boatswain to say, ‘Plague on thee, fellow, and
a pize on thee, knave, wherever I hit thee there is no pleasing thee.’”

“And truly there are some backs which Fortune is always belaboring,”
 thought Sir Wilfrid with a groan, “and mine is one that is ever sore.”

So, with a moderate retinue, whereof the knave Wamba made one, and
a large woollen comforter round his neck, which his wife’s own white
fingers had woven, Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe left home to join the King his
master. Rowena, standing on the steps, poured out a series of prayers
and blessings, most edifying to hear, as her lord mounted his charger,
which his squires led to the door. “It was the duty of the British
female of rank,” she said, “to suffer all--ALL in the cause of her
sovereign. SHE would not fear loneliness during the campaign: she would
bear up against widowhood, desertion, and an unprotected situation.”

“My cousin Athelstane will protect thee,” said Ivanhoe, with profound
emotion, as the tears trickled down his basenet; and bestowing a chaste
salute upon the steel-clad warrior, Rowena modestly said “she hoped his
Highness would be so kind.”

Then Ivanhoe’s trumpet blew: then Rowena waved her pocket-handkerchief:
then the household gave a shout: then the pursuivant of the good Knight,
Sir Wilfrid the Crusader, flung out his banner (which was argent, a
gules cramoisy with three Moors impaled sable): then Wamba gave a lash
on his mule’s haunch, and Ivanhoe, heaving a great sigh, turned the tail
of his war-horse upon the castle of his fathers.

As they rode along the forest, they met Athelstane the Thane powdering
along the road in the direction of Rotherwood on his great dray-horse
of a charger. “Good-by, good luck to you, old brick,” cried the Prince,
using the vernacular Saxon. “Pitch into those Frenchmen; give it ‘em
over the face and eyes; and I’ll stop at home and take care of Mrs. I.”

“Thank you, kinsman,” said Ivanhoe--looking, however, not particularly
well pleased; and the chiefs shaking hands, the train of each took its
different way--Athelstane’s to Rotherwood, Ivanhoe’s towards his place
of embarkation.

The poor knight had his wish, and yet his face was a yard long and as
yellow as a lawyer’s parchment; and having longed to quit home any time
these three years past, he found himself envying Athelstane, because,
forsooth, he was going to Rotherwood: which symptoms of discontent being
observed by the witless Wamba, caused that absurd madman to bring his
rebeck over his shoulder from his back, and to sing--

               “ATRA CURA.

     “Before I lost my five poor wits,
     I mind me of a Romish clerk,
     Who sang how Care, the phantom dark,
     Beside the belted horseman sits.
     Methought I saw the griesly sprite
     Jump up but now behind my Knight.”

“Perhaps thou didst, knave,” said Ivanhoe, looking over his shoulder;
and the knave went on with his jingle:

     “And though he gallop as he may,
     I mark that cursed monster black
     Still sits behind his honor’s back,
     Tight squeezing of his heart alway.
     Like two black Templars sit they there,
     Beside one crupper, Knight and Care.

     “No knight am I with pennoned spear,
     To prance upon a bold destrere:
     I will not have black Care prevail
     Upon my long-eared charger’s tail,
     For lo, I am a witless fool,
     And laugh at Grief and ride a mule.”

And his bells rattled as he kicked his mule’s sides.

“Silence, fool!” said Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, in a voice both majestic
and wrathful. “If thou knowest not care and grief, it is because thou
knowest not love, whereof they are the companions. Who can love without
an anxious heart? How shall there be joy at meeting, without tears at
parting?” (“I did not see that his honor or my lady shed many anon,”
 thought Wamba the Fool; but he was only a zany, and his mind was not
right.) “I would not exchange my very sorrows for thine indifference,”
 the knight continued. “Where there is a sun, there must be a shadow. If
the shadow offend me, shall I put out my eyes and live in the dark? No!
I am content with my fate, even such as it is. The Care of which thou
speakest, hard though it may vex him, never yet rode down an honest
man. I can bear him on my shoulders, and make my way through the world’s
press in spite of him; for my arm is strong, and my sword is keen, and
my shield has no stain on it; and my heart, though it is sad, knows no
guile.” And here, taking a locket out of his waistcoat (which was made
of chain-mail), the knight kissed the token, put it back under the
waistcoat again, heaved a profound sigh, and stuck spurs into his horse.

As for Wamba, he was munching a black pudding whilst Sir Wilfrid
was making the above speech, (which implied some secret grief on the
knight’s part, that must have been perfectly unintelligible to the
fool,) and so did not listen to a single word of Ivanhoe’s pompous
remarks. They travelled on by slow stages through the whole kingdom,
until they came to Dover, whence they took shipping for Calais. And in
this little voyage, being exceedingly sea-sick, and besides elated at
the thought of meeting his sovereign, the good knight cast away that
profound melancholy which had accompanied him during the whole of his
land journey.


CHAPTER II.

THE LAST DAYS OF THE LION.


From Calais Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe took the diligence across country to
Limoges, sending on Gurth, his squire, with the horses and the rest of
his attendants: with the exception of Wamba, who travelled not only as
the knight’s fool, but as his valet, and who, perched on the roof of the
carriage, amused himself by blowing tunes upon the conducteur’s French
horn. The good King Richard was, as Ivanhoe learned, in the Limousin,
encamped before a little place called Chalus; the lord whereof, though a
vassal of the King’s, was holding the castle against his sovereign with
a resolution and valor which caused a great fury and annoyance on the
part of the Monarch with the Lion Heart. For brave and magnanimous as
he was, the Lion-hearted one did not love to be balked any more than
another; and, like the royal animal whom he was said to resemble, he
commonly tore his adversary to pieces, and then, perchance, had leisure
to think how brave the latter had been. The Count of Chalus had found,
it was said, a pot of money; the royal Richard wanted it. As the count
denied that he had it, why did he not open the gates of his castle
at once? It was a clear proof that he was guilty; and the King was
determined to punish this rebel, and have his money and his life too.

He had naturally brought no breaching guns with him, because those
instruments were not yet invented: and though he had assaulted the place
a score of times with the utmost fury, his Majesty had been beaten
back on every occasion, until he was so savage that it was dangerous
to approach the British Lion. The Lion’s wife, the lovely Berengaria,
scarcely ventured to come near him. He flung the joint-stools in his
tent at the heads of the officers of state, and kicked his aides-de-camp
round his pavilion; and, in fact, a maid of honor, who brought a
sack-posset in to his Majesty from the Queen after he came in from the
assault, came spinning like a football out of the royal tent just as
Ivanhoe entered it.

“Send me my drum-major to flog that woman!” roared out the infuriate
King. “By the bones of St. Barnabas she has burned the sack! By St.
Wittikind, I will have her flayed alive. Ha, St. George! ha, St.
Richard! whom have we here?” And he lifted up his demi-culverin, or
curtal-axe--a weapon weighing about thirteen hundredweight--and was
about to fling it at the intruder’s head, when the latter, kneeling
gracefully on one knee, said calmly, “It is I, my good liege, Wilfrid of
Ivanhoe.”

“What, Wilfrid of Templestowe, Wilfrid the married man, Wilfrid the
henpecked!” cried the King with a sudden burst of good-humor, flinging
away the culverin from him, as though it had been a reed (it lighted
three hundred yards off, on the foot of Hugo de Bunyon, who was smoking
a cigar at the door of his tent, and caused that redoubted warrior to
limp for some days after). “What, Wilfrid my gossip? Art come to see
the lion’s den? There are bones in it, man, bones and carcasses, and the
lion is angry,” said the King, with a terrific glare of his eyes. “But
tush! we will talk of that anon. Ho! bring two gallons of hypocras for
the King and the good Knight, Wilfrid of Ivanhoe. Thou art come in
time, Wilfrid, for, by St. Richard and St. George, we will give a grand
assault to-morrow. There will be bones broken, ha!”

“I care not, my liege,” said Ivanhoe, pledging the sovereign
respectfully, and tossing off the whole contents of the bowl of hypocras
to his Highness’s good health. And he at once appeared to be taken into
high favor; not a little to the envy of many of the persons surrounding
the King.

As his Majesty said, there was fighting and feasting in plenty before
Chalus. Day after day, the besiegers made assaults upon the castle, but
it was held so stoutly by the Count of Chalus and his gallant
garrison, that each afternoon beheld the attacking-parties returning
disconsolately to their tents, leaving behind them many of their own
slain, and bringing back with them store of broken heads and maimed
limbs, received in the unsuccessful onset. The valor displayed by
Ivanhoe in all these contests was prodigious; and the way in which
he escaped death from the discharges of mangonels, catapults,
battering-rams, twenty-four pounders, boiling oil, and other artillery,
with which the besieged received their enemies, was remarkable. After
a day’s fighting, Gurth and Wamba used to pick the arrows out of their
intrepid master’s coat-of-mail, as if they had been so many almonds in
a pudding. ‘Twas well for the good knight, that under his first coat-of
armor he wore a choice suit of Toledan steel, perfectly impervious to
arrow-shots, and given to him by a certain Jew, named Isaac of York, to
whom he had done some considerable services a few years back.

If King Richard had not been in such a rage at the repeated failures of
his attacks upon the castle, that all sense of justice was blinded in
the lion-hearted monarch, he would have been the first to acknowledge
the valor of Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, and would have given him a Peerage
and the Grand Cross of the Bath at least a dozen times in the course of
the siege: for Ivanhoe led more than a dozen storming parties, and with
his own hand killed as many men (viz, two thousand three hundred
and fifty-one) within six, as were slain by the lion-hearted monarch
himself. But his Majesty was rather disgusted than pleased by his
faithful servant’s prowess; and all the courtiers, who hated Ivanhoe for
his superior valor and dexterity (for he would kill you off a couple of
hundreds of them of Chalus, whilst the strongest champions of the Kings
host could not finish more than their two dozen of a day), poisoned the
royal mind against Sir Wilfrid, and made the King look upon his feats of
arms with an evil eye. Roger de Backbite sneeringly told the King that
Sir Wilfrid had offered to bet an equal bet that he would kill more men
than Richard himself in the next assault: Peter de Toadhole said that
Ivanhoe stated everywhere that his Majesty was not the man he used to
be; that pleasures and drink had enervated him; that he could neither
ride, nor strike a blow with sword or axe, as he had been enabled to do
in the old times in Palestine: and finally, in the twenty-fifth assault,
in which they had very nearly carried the place, and in which onset
Ivanhoe slew seven, and his Majesty six, of the sons of the Count de
Chalus, its defender, Ivanhoe almost did for himself, by planting his
banner before the King’s upon the wall; and only rescued himself from
utter disgrace by saving his Majesty’s life several times in the course
of this most desperate onslaught.

Then the luckless knight’s very virtues (as, no doubt, my respected
readers know,) made him enemies amongst the men--nor was Ivanhoe liked
by the women frequenting the camp of the gay King Richard. His young
Queen, and a brilliant court of ladies, attended the pleasure-loving
monarch. His Majesty would transact business in the morning, then fight
severely from after breakfast till about three o’clock in the afternoon;
from which time, until after midnight, there was nothing but jigging
and singing, feasting and revelry, in the royal tents. Ivanhoe, who
was asked as a matter of ceremony, and forced to attend these
entertainments, not caring about the blandishments of any of the ladies
present, looked on at their ogling and dancing with a countenance as
glum as an undertaker’s, and was a perfect wet-blanket in the midst
of the festivities. His favorite resort and conversation were with a
remarkably austere hermit, who lived in the neighborhood of Chalus, and
with whom Ivanhoe loved to talk about Palestine, and the Jews, and other
grave matters of import, better than to mingle in the gayest amusements
of the court of King Richard. Many a night, when the Queen and the
ladies were dancing quadrilles and polkas (in which his Majesty, who was
enormously stout as well as tall, insisted upon figuring, and in which
he was about as graceful as an elephant dancing a hornpipe), Ivanhoe
would steal away from the ball, and come and have a night’s chat under
the moon with his reverend friend. It pained him to see a man of the
King’s age and size dancing about with the young folks. They laughed
at his Majesty whilst they flattered him: the pages and maids of honor
mimicked the royal mountebank almost to his face; and, if Ivanhoe ever
could have laughed, he certainly would one night when the King, in
light-blue satin inexpressibles, with his hair in powder, chose to dance
the minuet de la cour with the little Queen Berangeria.

Then, after dancing, his Majesty must needs order a guitar, and begin to
sing. He was said to compose his own songs--words and music--but those
who have read Lord Campobello’s “Lives of the Lord Chancellors” are
aware that there was a person by the name of Blondel, who, in fact, did
all the musical part of the King’s performances; and as for the words,
when a king writes verses, we may be sure there will be plenty of people
to admire his poetry. His Majesty would sing you a ballad, of which
he had stolen every idea, to an air that was ringing on all the
barrel-organs of Christendom, and, turning round to his courtiers, would
say, “How do you like that? I dashed it off this morning.” Or, “Blondel,
what do you think of this movement in B flat?” or what not; and the
courtiers and Blondel, you may be sure, would applaud with all their
might, like hypocrites as they were.

One evening--it was the evening of the 27th March, 1199, indeed--his
Majesty, who was in the musical mood, treated the court with a quantity
of his so-called composition, until the people were fairly tired of
clapping with their hands and laughing in their sleeves. First he sang
an ORIGINAL air and poem, beginning

     “Cherries nice, cherries nice, nice, come choose,
     Fresh and fair ones, who’ll refuse?” &c.

The which he was ready to take his affidavit he had composed the day
before yesterday. Then he sang an equally ORIGINAL heroic melody, of
which the chorus was

     “Rule Britannia, Britannia rules the sea,
     For Britons never, never, never slaves shall be,” &c.

The courtiers applauded this song as they did the other, all except
Ivanhoe, who sat without changing a muscle of his features, until the
King questioned him, when the knight, with a bow said “he thought he had
heard something very like the air and the words elsewhere.” His Majesty
scowled at him a savage glance from under his red bushy eyebrows; but
Ivanhoe had saved the royal life that day, and the King, therefore, with
difficulty controlled his indignation.

“Well,” said he, “by St. Richard and St. George, but ye never heard THIS
song, for I composed it this very afternoon as I took my bath after the
melee. Did I not, Blondel?”

Blondel, of course, was ready to take an affidavit that his Majesty had
done as he said, and the King, thrumming on his guitar with his great
red fingers and thumbs, began to sing out of tune and as follows:--

     “COMMANDERS OF THE FAITHFUL.

     “The Pope he is a happy man,
     His Palace is the Vatican,
     And there he sits and drains his can:
     The Pope he is a happy man.
     I often say when I’m at home,
     I’d like to be the Pope of Rome.

     “And then there’s Sultan Saladin,
     That Turkish Soldan full of sin;
     He has a hundred wives at least,
     By which his pleasure is increased:
     I’ve often wished, I hope no sin,
     That I were Sultan Saladin.

     “But no, the Pope no wife may choose,
     And so I would not wear his shoes;
     No wine may drink the proud Paynim,
     And so I’d rather not be him:
     My wife, my wine, I love I hope,
     And would be neither Turk nor Pope.”

“Encore! Encore! Bravo! Bis!” Everybody applauded the King’s song with
all his might: everybody except Ivanhoe, who preserved his abominable
gravity: and when asked aloud by Roger de Backbite whether he had heard
that too, said firmly, “Yes, Roger de Backbite; and so hast thou if thou
darest but tell the truth.”

“Now, by St. Cicely, may I never touch gittern again,” bawled the King
in a fury, “if every note, word, and thought be not mine; may I die in
to-morrow’s onslaught if the song be not my song. Sing thyself, Wilfrid
of the Lanthorn Jaws; thou could’st sing a good song in old times.” And
with all his might, and with a forced laugh, the King, who loved brutal
practical jests, flung his guitar at the head of Ivanhoe.

Sir Wilfrid caught it gracefully with one hand, and making an elegant
bow to the sovereign, began to chant as follows:--

                             “KING CANUTE.

     “King Canute was weary-hearted; he had reigned for years a score,
     Battling, struggling, pushing, fighting, killing much and robbing
     more;
     And he thought upon his actions, walking by the wild sea-shore.

     “‘Twixt the Chancellor and Bishop walked the King with steps
          sedate,
     Chamberlains and grooms came after, silversticks and goldsticks
          great,
     Chaplains, aides-de-camp, and pages,--all the officers of state.

     “Sliding after like his shadow, pausing when he chose to pause,
     If a frown his face contracted, straight the courtiers dropped
          their jaws;
     If to laugh the King was minded, out they burst in loud hee-haws.

     “But that day a something vexed him, that was clear to old and
        young:
     Thrice his Grace had yawned at table, when his favorite gleemen
        sung,
     Once the Queen would have consoled him, but he bade her hold her
        tongue.

     “‘Something ails my gracious master,’ cried the Keeper of the Seal.
     ‘Sure, my lord, it is the lampreys served at dinner, or the veal?’
     ‘Psha!’ exclaimed the angry monarch.  ‘Keeper, ‘tis not that I
          feel.

     “‘’Tis the HEART, and not the dinner, fool, that doth my rest
          impair:
     Can a King be great as I am, prithee, and yet know no care?
     Oh, I’m sick, and tired, and weary.’--Some one cried, ‘The King’s
        arm-chair?’

     “Then towards the lackeys turning, quick my Lord the Keeper nodded,
     Straight the King’s great chair was brought him, by two footmen
        able-bodied;
     Languidly he sank into it: it was comfortably wadded.

     “‘Leading on my fierce companions,’ cried be, ‘over storm and
          brine,
     I have fought and I have conquered!  Where was glory like to mine?’
     Loudly all the courtiers echoed: ‘Where is glory like to thine?’

     “‘What avail me all my kingdoms?  Weary am I now, and old;
     Those fair sons I have begotten, long to see me dead and cold;
     Would I were, and quiet buried, underneath the silent mould!

     “‘Oh, remorse, the writhing serpent! at my bosom tears and bites;
     Horrid, horrid things I look on, though I put out all the lights;
     Ghosts of ghastly recollections troop about my bed of nights.

     “‘Cities burning, convents blazing, red with sacrilegious fires;
     Mothers weeping, virgins screaming, vainly for their slaughtered
     sires.’--Such a tender conscience,’ cries the Bishop, ‘every
          one admires.

     “‘But for such unpleasant bygones, cease, my gracious lord, to
         search,
     They’re forgotten and forgiven by our Holy Mother Church;
     Never, never does she leave her benefactors in the lurch.

     “‘Look! the land is crowned with minsters, which your Grace’s
          bounty raised;
     Abbeys filled with holy men, where you and Heaven are daily
          praised:
     YOU, my lord, to think of dying? on my conscience I’m amazed!’

     “‘Nay, I feel,’ replied King Canute, ‘that my end is drawing near.’
     ‘Don’t say so,’ exclaimed the courtiers (striving each to squeeze a
     tear).
     ‘Sure your Grace is strong and lusty, and may live this fifty
          year.’

     “‘Live these fifty years!’ the Bishop roared, with actions made to
          suit.
     ‘Are you mad, my good Lord Keeper, thus to speak of King Canute!
     Men have lived a thousand years, and sure his Majesty will do’t.

     “‘Adam, Enoch, Lamech, Cainan, Mahaleel, Methusela,
     Lived nine hundred years apiece, and mayn’t the King as well as
     they?’
     ‘Fervently,’ exclaimed the Keeper, ‘fervently I trust he may.’

     “‘HE to die?’ resumed the Bishop.  ‘He a mortal like to US?
     Death was not for him intended, though communis omnibus:
     Keeper, you are irreligious, for to talk and cavil thus.

     “‘With his wondrous skill in healing ne’er a doctor can compete,
     Loathsome lepers, if he touch them, start up clean upon their feet;
     Surely he could raise the dead up, did his Highness think it meet.

     “‘Did not once the Jewish captain stay the sun upon the hill,
     And, the while he slew the foemen, bid the silver moon stand still?
     So, no doubt, could gracious Canute, if it were his sacred will.’

     “‘Might I stay the sun above us, good Sir Bishop?’ Canute cried;
     ‘Could I bid the silver moon to pause upon her heavenly ride?
     If the moon obeys my orders, sure I can command the tide.

     “‘Will the advancing waves obey me, Bishop, if I make the sign?’
     Said the Bishop, bowing lowly, ‘Land and sea, my lord, are thine.’
     Canute turned towards the ocean--‘Back!’ he said, ‘thou foaming
     brine

     “‘From the sacred shore I stand on, I command thee to retreat;
     Venture not, thou stormy rebel, to approach thy master’s seat:
     Ocean, be thou still! I bid thee come not nearer to my feet!’

     “But the sullen ocean answered with a louder, deeper roar,
     And the rapid waves drew nearer, falling sounding on the shore;
     Back the Keeper and the Bishop, back the King and courtiers bore.

     “And he sternly bade them never more to kneel to human clay,
     But alone to praise and worship That which earth and seas obey:
     And his golden crown of empire never wore he from that day.
     King Canute is dead and gone: Parasites exist alway.”

At this ballad, which, to be sure, was awfully long, and as grave as a
sermon, some of the courtiers tittered, some yawned, and some affected
to be asleep and snore outright. But Roger de Backbite thinking to curry
favor with the King by this piece of vulgarity, his Majesty fetched
him a knock on the nose and a buffet on the ear, which, I warrant me,
wakened Master Roger; to whom the King said, “Listen and be civil,
slave; Wilfrid is singing about thee.--Wilfrid, thy ballad is long, but
it is to the purpose, and I have grown cool during thy homily. Give
me thy hand, honest friend. Ladies, good night. Gentlemen, we give the
grand assault to-morrow; when I promise thee, Wilfrid, thy banner shall
not be before mine.”--And the King, giving his arm to her Majesty,
retired into the private pavilion.


CHAPTER III.

ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND.


Whilst the royal Richard and his court were feasting in the camp outside
the walls of Chalus, they of the castle were in the most miserable
plight that may be conceived. Hunger, as well as the fierce assaults
of the besiegers, had made dire ravages in the place. The garrison’s
provisions of corn and cattle, their very horses, dogs, and donkeys had
been eaten up--so that it might well be said by Wamba “that famine, as
well as slaughter, had THINNED the garrison.” When the men of Chalus
came on the walls to defend it against the scaling-parties of King
Richard, they were like so many skeletons in armor; they could hardly
pull their bowstrings at last, or pitch down stones on the heads of his
Majesty’s party, so weak had their arms become; and the gigantic Count
of Chalus--a warrior as redoubtable for his size and strength as Richard
Plantagenet himself--was scarcely able to lift up his battle-axe upon
the day of that last assault, when Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe ran him
through the--but we are advancing matters.

What should prevent me from describing the agonies of hunger which the
Count (a man of large appetite) suffered in company with his heroic sons
and garrison?--Nothing, but that Dante has already done the business
in the notorious history of Count Ugolino; so that my efforts might be
considered as mere imitations. Why should I not, if I were minded to
revel in horrifying details, show you how the famished garrison drew
lots, and ate themselves during the siege; and how the unlucky lot
falling upon the Countess of Chalus, that heroic woman, taking an
affectionate leave of her family, caused her large caldron in the castle
kitchen to be set a-boiling, had onions, carrots and herbs, pepper and
salt made ready, to make a savory soup, as the French like it; and when
all things were quite completed, kissed her children, jumped into the
caldron from off a kitchen stool, and so was stewed down in her flannel
bed-gown? Dear friends, it is not from want of imagination, or from
having no turn for the terrible or pathetic, that I spare you these
details. I could give you some description that would spoil your dinner
and night’s rest, and make your hair stand on end. But why harrow your
feelings? Fancy all the tortures and horrors that possibly can occur in
a beleaguered and famished castle: fancy the feelings of men who know
that no more quarter will be given them than they would get if they
were peaceful Hungarian citizens kidnapped and brought to trial by his
Majesty the Emperor of Austria; and then let us rush on to the breach
and prepare once more to meet the assault of dreadful King Richard and
his men.

On the 29th of March in the year 1199, the good King, having copiously
partaken of breakfast, caused his trumpets to blow, and advanced with
his host upon the breach of the castle of Chalus. Arthur de Pendennis
bore his banner; Wilfrid of Ivanhoe fought on the King’s right hand.
Molyneux, Bishop of Bullocksmithy, doffed crosier and mitre for that
day, and though fat and pursy, panted up the breach with the most
resolute spirit, roaring out war-cries and curses, and wielding a
prodigious mace of iron, with which he did good execution. Roger de
Backbite was forced to come in attendance upon the sovereign, but took
care to keep in the rear of his august master, and to shelter behind his
huge triangular shield as much as possible. Many lords of note followed
the King and bore the ladders; and as they were placed against the wall,
the air was perfectly dark with the shower of arrows which the French
archers poured out at the besiegers, and the cataract of stones,
kettles, bootjacks, chests of drawers, crockery, umbrellas,
congreve-rockets, bombshells, bolts and arrows and other missiles
which the desperate garrison flung out on the storming-party. The King
received a copper coal-scuttle right over his eyes, and a mahogany
wardrobe was discharged at his morion, which would have felled an
ox, and would have done for the King had not Ivanhoe warded it off
skilfully. Still they advanced, the warriors falling around them like
grass beneath the scythe of the mower.

The ladders were placed in spite of the hail of death raining round: the
King and Ivanhoe were, of course, the first to mount them. Chalus stood
in the breach, borrowing strength from despair; and roaring out, “Ha!
Plantagenet, St. Barbacue for Chalus!” he dealt the King a crack across
the helmet with his battle-axe, which shore off the gilt lion and
crown that surmounted the steel cap. The King bent and reeled back; the
besiegers were dismayed; the garrison and the Count of Chalus set up a
shout of triumph: but it was premature.

As quick as thought Ivanhoe was into the Count with a thrust in tierce,
which took him just at the joint of the armor, and ran him through as
clean as a spit does a partridge. Uttering a horrid shriek, he fell
back writhing; the King recovering staggered up the parapet; the rush
of knights followed, and the union-jack was planted triumphantly on the
walls, just as Ivanhoe,--but we must leave him for a moment.

“Ha, St. Richard!--ha, St. George!” the tremendous voice of the
Lion-king was heard over the loudest roar of the onset. At every sweep
of his blade a severed head flew over the parapet, a spouting trunk
tumbled, bleeding, on the flags of the bartizan. The world hath never
seen a warrior equal to that Lion-hearted Plantagenet, as he raged
over the keep, his eyes flashing fire through the bars of his morion,
snorting and chafing with the hot lust of battle. One by one les enfans
de Chalus had fallen; there was only one left at last of all the brave
race that had fought round the gallant Count:--only one, and but a boy,
a fair-haired boy, a blue-eyed boy! he had been gathering pansies in the
fields but yesterday--it was but a few years, and he was a baby in his
mother’s arms! What could his puny sword do against the most redoubted
blade in Christendom?--and yet Bohemond faced the great champion of
England, and met him foot to foot! Turn away, turn away, my dear young
friends and kind-hearted ladies! Do not look at that ill-fated poor boy!
his blade is crushed into splinters under the axe of the conqueror, and
the poor child is beaten to his knee! . . .

“Now, by St. Barbacue of Limoges,” said Bertrand de Gourdon, “the
butcher will never strike down yonder lambling! Hold thy hand, Sir King,
or, by St. Barbacue--”

Swift as thought the veteran archer raised his arblast to his shoulder,
the whizzing bolt fled from the ringing string, and the next moment
crashed quivering into the corselet of Plantagenet.

‘Twas a luckless shot, Bertrand of Gourdon! Maddened by the pain of the
wound, the brute nature of Richard was aroused: his fiendish appetite
for blood rose to madness, and grinding his teeth, and with a curse too
horrible to mention, the flashing axe of the royal butcher fell down
on the blond ringlets of the child, and the children of Chalus were no
more! . . .


I just throw this off by way of description, and to show what MIGHT be
done if I chose to indulge in this style of composition; but as in the
battles which are described by the kindly chronicler, of one of whose
works this present masterpiece is professedly a continuation, everything
passes off agreeably--the people are slain, but without any unpleasant
sensation to the reader; nay, some of the most savage and blood-stained
characters of history, such is the indomitable good-humor of the great
novelist, become amiable, jovial companions, for whom one has a hearty
sympathy--so, if you please, we will have this fighting business at
Chalus, and the garrison and honest Bertrand of Gourdon, disposed of;
the former, according to the usage of the good old times, having been
hung up or murdered to a man, and the latter killed in the manner
described by the late Dr. Goldsmith in his History.

As for the Lion-hearted, we all very well know that the shaft of
Bertrand de Gourdon put an end to the royal hero--and that from that
29th of March he never robbed nor murdered any more. And we have legends
in recondite books of the manner of the King’s death.

“You must die, my son,” said the venerable Walter of Rouen, as
Berengaria was carried shrieking from the King’s tent. “Repent, Sir
King, and separate yourself from your children!”

“It is ill jesting with a dying man,” replied the King. “Children have I
none, my good lord bishop, to inherit after me.”

“Richard of England,” said the archbishop, turning up his fine eyes,
“your vices are your children. Ambition is your eldest child, Cruelty
is your second child, Luxury is your third child; and you have nourished
them from your youth up. Separate yourself from these sinful ones, and
prepare your soul, for the hour of departure draweth nigh.”

Violent, wicked, sinful, as he might have been, Richard of England met
his death like a Christian man. Peace be to the soul of the brave! When
the news came to King Philip of France, he sternly forbade his courtiers
to rejoice at the death of his enemy. “It is no matter of joy but of
dolor,” he said, “that the bulwark of Christendom and the bravest king
of Europe is no more.”


Meanwhile what has become of Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, whom we left in the
act of rescuing his sovereign by running the Count of Chalus through the
body?

As the good knight stooped down to pick his sword out of the corpse of
his fallen foe, some one coming behind him suddenly thrust a dagger into
his back at a place where his shirt-of-mail was open (for Sir Wilfrid
had armed that morning in a hurry, and it was his breast, not his back,
that he was accustomed ordinarily to protect); and when poor Wamba came
up on the rampart, which he did when the fighting was over,--being
such a fool that he could not be got to thrust his head into danger for
glory’s sake--he found his dear knight with the dagger in his back
lying without life upon the body of the Count de Chalus whom he had anon
slain.

Ah, what a howl poor Wamba set up when he found his master killed!
How he lamented over the corpse of that noble knight and friend! What
mattered it to him that Richard the King was borne wounded to his tent,
and that Bertrand de Gourdon was flayed alive? At another time the sight
of this spectacle might have amused the simple knave; but now all his
thoughts were of his lord: so good, so gentle, so kind, so loyal, so
frank with the great, so tender to the poor, so truthful of speech, so
modest regarding his own merit, so true a gentleman, in a word, that
anybody might, with reason, deplore him.

As Wamba opened the dear knight’s corselet, he found a locket round
his neck, in which there was some hair; not flaxen like that of my
Lady Rowena, who was almost as fair as an Albino, but as black, Wamba
thought, as the locks of the Jewish maiden whom the knight had rescued
in the lists of Templestowe. A bit of Rowena’s hair was in Sir Wilfrid’s
possession, too; but that was in his purse along with his seal of arms,
and a couple of groats: for the good knight never kept any money, so
generous was he of his largesses when money came in.

Wamba took the purse, and seal, and groats, but he left the locket of
hair round his master’s neck, and when he returned to England never said
a word about the circumstance. After all, how should he know whose hair
it was? It might have been the knight’s grandmother’s hair for aught the
fool knew; so he kept his counsel when he brought back the sad news and
tokens to the disconsolate widow at Rotherwood.

The poor fellow would never have left the body at all, and indeed sat
by it all night, and until the gray of the morning; when, seeing two
suspicious-looking characters advancing towards him, he fled in dismay,
supposing that they were marauders who were out searching for booty
among the dead bodies; and having not the least courage, he fled from
these, and tumbled down the breach, and never stopped running as fast as
his legs would carry him, until he reached the tent of his late beloved
master.

The news of the knight’s demise, it appeared, had been known at his
quarters long before; for his servants were gone, and had ridden off
on his horses; his chests were plundered: there was not so much as a
shirt-collar left in his drawers, and the very bed and blankets had been
carried away by these FAITHFUL attendants. Who had slain Ivanhoe? That
remains a mystery to the present day; but Roger de Backbite, whose nose
he had pulled for defamation, and who was behind him in the assault at
Chalus, was seen two years afterwards at the court of King John in
an embroidered velvet waistcoat which Rowena could have sworn she had
worked for Ivanhoe, and about which the widow would have made some
little noise, but that--but that she was no longer a widow.

That she truly deplored the death of her lord cannot be questioned,
for she ordered the deepest mourning which any milliner in York could
supply, and erected a monument to his memory as big as a minster. But
she was a lady of such fine principles, that she did not allow her grief
to overmaster her; and an opportunity speedily arising for uniting the
two best Saxon families in England, by an alliance between herself
and the gentleman who offered himself to her, Rowena sacrificed her
inclination to remain single, to her sense of duty; and contracted a
second matrimonial engagement.

That Athelstane was the man, I suppose no reader familiar with life, and
novels which are a rescript of life, and are all strictly natural and
edifying, can for a moment doubt. Cardinal Pandulfo tied the knot for
them: and lest there should be any doubt about Ivanhoe’s death (for his
body was never sent home after all, nor seen after Wamba ran away from
it), his Eminence procured a Papal decree annulling the former marriage,
so that Rowena became Mrs. Athelstane with a clear conscience. And who
shall be surprised, if she was happier with the stupid and boozy Thane
than with the gentle and melancholy Wilfrid? Did women never have a
predilection for fools, I should like to know; or fall in love with
donkeys, before the time of the amours of Bottom and Titania? Ah! Mary,
had you not preferred an ass to a man, would you have married Jack Bray,
when a Michael Angelo offered? Ah! Fanny, were you not a woman, would
you persist in adoring Tom Hiccups, who beats you, and comes home
tipsy from the Club? Yes, Rowena cared a hundred times more about tipsy
Athelstane than ever she had done for gentle Ivanhoe, and so great was
her infatuation about the former, that she would sit upon his knee in
the presence of all her maidens, and let him smoke his cigars in the
very drawing-room.

This is the epitaph she caused to be written by Father Drono (who piqued
himself upon his Latinity) on the stone commemorating the death of her
late lord:--

     Hic est Guilfridus, belli dum vixit avidus:
     Cum gladio et lancea, Normania et quoque Francia
     Verbera dura dabat: per Turcos multum equitabat:
     Guilbertum occidit: atque Hierosolyma vidit.
     Heu! nunc sub fossa sunt tanti militis ossa,
     Uxor Athelstani est conjux castissima Thani.

And this is the translation which the doggerel knave Wamba made of the
Latin lines:

                 “REQUIESCAT.

     “Under the stone you behold,
     Buried, and coffined, and cold,
     Lieth Sir Wilfrid the Bold.

     “Always he marched in advance,
     Warring in Flanders and France,
     Doughty with sword and with lance.

     “Famous in Saracen fight,
     Rode in his youth the good knight,
     Scattering Paynims in flight.

     “Brian the Templar untrue,
     Fairly in tourney he slew,
     Saw Hierusalem too.

     “Now he is buried and gone,
     Lying beneath the gray stone:
     Where shall you find such a one?

     “Long time his widow deplored,
     Weeping the fate of her lord,
     Sadly cut off by the sword.

     “When she was eased of her pain,
     Came the good Lord Athelstane,
     When her ladyship married again.”

Athelstane burst into a loud laugh, when he heard it, at the last
line, but Rowena would have had the fool whipped, had not the Thane
interceded; and to him, she said, she could refuse nothing.


CHAPTER IV.

IVANHOE REDIVIVUS.


I trust nobody will suppose, from the events described in the last
chapter, that our friend Ivanhoe is really dead. Because we have given
him an epitaph or two and a monument, are these any reasons that he
should be really gone out of the world? No: as in the pantomime, when
we see Clown and Pantaloon lay out Harlequin and cry over him, we are
always sure that Master Harlequin will be up at the next minute alert
and shining in his glistening coat; and, after giving a box on the ears
to the pair of them, will be taking a dance with Columbine, or leaping
gayly through the clock-face, or into the three-pair-of-stairs’
window:--so Sir Wilfrid, the Harlequin of our Christmas piece, may be
run through a little, or may make believe to be dead, but will assuredly
rise up again when he is wanted, and show himself at the right moment.

The suspicious-looking characters from whom Wamba ran away were no
cut-throats and plunderers, as the poor knave imagined, but no other
than Ivanhoe’s friend, the hermit, and a reverend brother of his, who
visited the scene of the late battle in order to see if any Christians
still survived there, whom they might shrive and get ready for heaven,
or to whom they might possibly offer the benefit of their skill as
leeches. Both were prodigiously learned in the healing art; and had
about them those precious elixirs which so often occur in romances, and
with which patients are so miraculously restored. Abruptly dropping his
master’s head from his lap as he fled, poor Wamba caused the knight’s
pate to fall with rather a heavy thump to the ground, and if the knave
had but stayed a minute longer, he would have heard Sir Wilfrid utter a
deep groan. But though the fool heard him not, the holy hermits did; and
to recognize the gallant Wilfrid, to withdraw the enormous dagger
still sticking out of his back, to wash the wound with a portion of the
precious elixir, and to pour a little of it down his throat, was with
the excellent hermits the work of an instant: which remedies being
applied, one of the good men took the knight by the heels and the other
by the head, and bore him daintily from the castle to their hermitage in
a neighboring rock. As for the Count of Chalus, and the remainder of the
slain, the hermits were too much occupied with Ivanhoe’s case to mind
them, and did not, it appears, give them any elixir: so that, if they
are really dead, they must stay on the rampart stark and cold; or if
otherwise, when the scene closes upon them as it does now, they may
get up, shake themselves, go to the slips and drink a pot of porter, or
change their stage-clothes and go home to supper. My dear readers, you
may settle the matter among yourselves as you like. If you wish to kill
the characters really off, let them be dead, and have done with them:
but, entre nous, I don’t believe they are any more dead than you or I
are, and sometimes doubt whether there is a single syllable of truth in
this whole story.

Well, Ivanhoe was taken to the hermits’ cell, and there doctored by the
holy fathers for his hurts; which were of such a severe and dangerous
order, that he was under medical treatment for a very considerable time.
When he woke up from his delirium, and asked how long he had been ill,
fancy his astonishment when he heard that he had been in the fever for
six years! He thought the reverend fathers were joking at first, but
their profession forbade them from that sort of levity; and besides,
he could not possibly have got well any sooner, because the story would
have been sadly put out had he appeared earlier. And it proves how good
the fathers were to him, and how very nearly that scoundrel of a Roger
de Backbite’s dagger had finished him, that he did not get well under
this great length of time; during the whole of which the fathers tended
him without ever thinking of a fee. I know of a kind physician in this
town who does as much sometimes; but I won’t do him the ill service of
mentioning his name here.

Ivanhoe, being now quickly pronounced well, trimmed his beard, which by
this time hung down considerably below his knees, and calling for his
suit of chain-armor, which before had fitted his elegant person as tight
as wax, now put it on, and it bagged and hung so loosely about him, that
even the good friars laughed at his absurd appearance. It was impossible
that he should go about the country in such a garb as that: the very
boys would laugh at him: so the friars gave him one of their old gowns,
in which he disguised himself, and after taking an affectionate farewell
of his friends, set forth on his return to his native country. As he
went along, he learned that Richard was dead, that John reigned, that
Prince Arthur had been poisoned, and was of course made acquainted with
various other facts of public importance recorded in Pinnock’s Catechism
and the Historic Page.

But these subjects did not interest him near so much as his own private
affairs; and I can fancy that his legs trembled under him, and his
pilgrim’s staff shook with emotion, as at length, after many perils, he
came in sight of his paternal mansion of Rotherwood, and saw once more
the chimneys smoking, the shadows of the oaks over the grass in the
sunset, and the rooks winging over the trees. He heard the supper
gong sounding: he knew his way to the door well enough; he entered the
familiar hall with a benedicite, and without any more words took his
place.

*****

You might have thought for a moment that the gray friar trembled and his
shrunken cheek looked deadly pale; but he recovered himself presently:
nor could you see his pallor for the cowl which covered his face.

A little boy was playing on Athelstane’s knee; Rowena smiling and
patting the Saxon Thane fondly on his broad bullhead, filled him a huge
cup of spiced wine from a golden jug. He drained a quart of the liquor,
and, turning round, addressed the friar:--

“And so, gray frere, thou sawest good King Richard fall at Chalus by the
bolt of that felon bowman?”

“We did, an it please you. The brothers of our house attended the good
King in his last moments: in truth, he made a Christian ending!”

“And didst thou see the archer flayed alive? It must have been rare
sport,” roared Athelstane, laughing hugely at the joke. “How the fellow
must have howled!”

“My love!” said Rowena, interposing tenderly, and putting a pretty white
finger on his lip.

“I would have liked to see it too,” cried the boy.

“That’s my own little Cedric, and so thou shalt. And, friar, didst
see my poor kinsman Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe? They say he fought well at
Chalus!”

“My sweet lord,” again interposed Rowena, “mention him not.”

“Why? Because thou and he were so tender in days of yore--when you could
not bear my plain face, being all in love with his pale one?”

“Those times are past now, dear Athelstane,” said his affectionate wife,
looking up to the ceiling.

“Marry, thou never couldst forgive him the Jewess, Rowena.”

“The odious hussy! don’t mention the name of the unbelieving creature,”
 exclaimed the lady.

“Well, well, poor Wil was a good lad--a thought melancholy and milksop
though. Why, a pint of sack fuddled his poor brains.”

“Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe was a good lance,” said the friar. “I have heard
there was none better in Christendom. He lay in our convent after his
wounds, and it was there we tended him till he died. He was buried in
our north cloister.”

“And there’s an end of him,” said Athelstane. “But come, this is dismal
talk. Where’s Wamba the Jester? Let us have a song. Stir up, Wamba, and
don’t lie like a dog in the fire! Sing us a song, thou crack-brained
jester, and leave off whimpering for bygones. Tush, man! There be many
good fellows left in this world.”

“There be buzzards in eagles’ nests,” Wamba said, who was lying
stretched before the fire, sharing the hearth with the Thane’s dogs.
“There be dead men alive, and live men dead. There be merry songs and
dismal songs. Marry, and the merriest are the saddest sometimes. I will
leave off motley and wear black, gossip Athelstane. I will turn howler
at funerals, and then, perhaps, I shall be merry. Motley is fit for
mutes, and black for fools. Give me some drink, gossip, for my voice is
as cracked as my brain.”

“Drink and sing, thou beast, and cease prating,” the Thane said.

And Wamba, touching his rebeck wildly, sat up in the chimney-side and
curled his lean shanks together and began:--

                 “LOVE AT TWO SCORE.

          “Ho! pretty page, with dimpled chin,
             That never has known the barber’s shear,
          All your aim is woman to win--
          This is the way that boys begin--
            Wait till you’ve come to forty year!

          “Curly gold locks cover foolish brains,
             Billing and cooing is all your cheer,
           Sighing and singing of midnight strains
           Under Bonnybells’ window-panes.
             Wait till you’ve come to forty year!

          “Forty times over let Michaelmas pass,
             Grizzling hair the brain doth clear;
           Then you know a boy is an ass,
           Then you know the worth of a lass,
             Once you have come to forty year.

          “Pledge me round, I bid ye declare,
             All good fellows whose beards are gray:
           Did not the fairest of the fair
           Common grow, and wearisome, ere
             Ever a month was passed away?

          “The reddest lips that ever have kissed,
             The brightest eyes that ever have shone,
           May pray and whisper and we not list,
           Or look away and never be missed,
             Ere yet ever a month was gone.

          “Gillian’s dead, Heaven rest her bier,
             How I loved her twenty years syne!
           Marian’s married, but I sit here,
           Alive and merry at forty year,
             Dipping my nose in the Gascon wine.”

“Who taught thee that merry lay, Wamba, thou son of Witless?” roared
Athelstane, clattering his cup on the table and shouting the chorus.

“It was a good and holy hermit, sir, the pious clerk of Copmanhurst,
that you wot of, who played many a prank with us in the days that we
knew King Richard. Ah, noble sir, that was a jovial time and a good
priest.”

“They say the holy priest is sure of the next bishopric, my love,”
 said Rowena. “His Majesty hath taken him into much favor. My Lord of
Huntingdon looked very well at the last ball; but I never could see any
beauty in the Countess--a freckled, blowsy thing, whom they used to
call Maid Marian: though, for the matter of that, what between her
flirtations with Major Littlejohn and Captain Scarlett, really--”

“Jealous again--haw! haw!” laughed Athelstane.

“I am above jealousy, and scorn it,” Rowena answered, drawing herself up
very majestically.

“Well, well, Wamba’s was a good song,” Athelstane said.

“Nay, a wicked song,” said Rowena, turning up her eyes as usual. “What!
rail at woman’s love? Prefer a filthy wine cup to a true wife?
Woman’s love is eternal, my Athelstane. He who questions it would be
a blasphemer were he not a fool. The well-born and well-nurtured
gentlewoman loves once and once only.”

“I pray you, madam, pardon me, I--I am not well,” said the gray friar,
rising abruptly from his settle, and tottering down the steps of the
dais. Wamba sprung after him, his bells jingling as he rose, and casting
his arms around the apparently fainting man, he led him away into the
court. “There be dead men alive and live men dead,” whispered he. “There
be coffins to laugh at and marriages to cry over. Said I not sooth, holy
friar?” And when they had got out into the solitary court, which was
deserted by all the followers of the Thane, who were mingling in the
drunken revelry in the hall, Wamba, seeing that none were by, knelt
down, and kissing the friar’s garment, said, “I knew thee, I knew thee,
my lord and my liege!”

“Get up,” said Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, scarcely able to articulate: “only
fools are faithful.”

And he passed on, and into the little chapel where his father lay
buried. All night long the friar spent there: and Wamba the Jester lay
outside watching as mute as the saint over the porch.


When the morning came, Wumba was gone; and the knave being in the habit
of wandering hither and thither as he chose, little notice was taken of
his absence by a master and mistress who had not much sense of humor.
As for Sir Wilfrid, a gentleman of his delicacy of feelings could not be
expected to remain in a house where things so naturally disagreeable
to him were occurring, and he quitted Rotherwood incontinently, after
paying a dutiful visit to the tomb where his old father, Cedric, was
buried; and hastened on to York, at which city he made himself known to
the family attorney, a most respectable man, in whose hands his ready
money was deposited, and took up a sum sufficient to fit himself
out with credit, and a handsome retinue, as became a knight of
consideration. But he changed his name, wore a wig and spectacles, and
disguised himself entirely, so that it was impossible his friends or the
public should know him, and thus metamorphosed, went about whithersoever
his fancy led him. He was present at a public ball at York, which the
lord mayor gave, danced Sir Roger de Coverley in the very same set with
Rowena--(who was disgusted that Maid Marian took precedence of her)--he
saw little Athelstane overeat himself at the supper and pledge his big
father in a cup of sack; he met the Reverend Mr. Tuck at a missionary
meeting, where he seconded a resolution proposed by that eminent
divine;--in fine, he saw a score of his old acquaintances, none of whom
recognized in him the warrior of Palestine and Templestowe. Having a
large fortune and nothing to do, he went about this country performing
charities, slaying robbers, rescuing the distressed, and achieving noble
feats of arms. Dragons and giants existed in his day no more, or be
sure he would have had a fling at them: for the truth is, Sir Wilfrid
of Ivanhoe was somewhat sick of the life which the hermits of Chalus
had restored to him, and felt himself so friendless and solitary that he
would not have been sorry to come to an end of it. Ah, my dear friends
and intelligent British public, are there not others who are melancholy
under a mask of gayety, and who, in the midst of crowds, are lonely?
Liston was a most melancholy man; Grimaldi had feelings; and there are
others I wot of:--but psha!--let us have the next chapter.


CHAPTER V.

IVANHOE TO THE RESCUE.


The rascally manner in which the chicken-livered successor of Richard of
the Lion-heart conducted himself to all parties, to his relatives, his
nobles, and his people, is a matter notorious, and set forth clearly in
the Historic Page: hence, although nothing, except perhaps success, can,
in my opinion, excuse disaffection to the sovereign, or appearance in
armed rebellion against him, the loyal reader will make allowance for
two of the principal personages of this narrative, who will have to
appear in the present chapter in the odious character of rebels to their
lord and king. It must be remembered, in partial exculpation of the
fault of Athelstane and Rowena, (a fault for which they were bitterly
punished, as you shall presently hear,) that the monarch exasperated
his subjects in a variety of ways,--that before he murdered his royal
nephew, Prince Arthur, there was a great question whether he was the
rightful king of England at all,--that his behavior as an uncle, and
a family man, was likely to wound the feelings of any lady and
mother,--finally, that there were palliations for the conduct of Rowena
and Ivanhoe, which it now becomes our duty to relate.

When his Majesty destroyed Prince Arthur, the Lady Rowena, who was one
of the ladies of honor to the Queen, gave up her place at court at once,
and retired to her castle of Rotherwood. Expressions made use of by her,
and derogatory to the character of the sovereign, were carried to the
monarch’s ears, by some of those parasites, doubtless, by whom it is
the curse of kings to be attended; and John swore, by St. Peter’s teeth,
that he would be revenged upon the haughty Saxon lady,--a kind of oath
which, though he did not trouble himself about all other oaths, he was
never known to break. It was not for some years after he had registered
this vow, that he was enabled to keep it.

Had Ivanhoe been present at Ronen, when the King meditated his horrid
designs against his nephew, there is little doubt that Sir Wilfrid would
have prevented them, and rescued the boy: for Ivanhoe was, as we need
scarcely say, a hero of romance; and it is the custom and duty of all
gentlemen of that profession to be present on all occasions of historic
interest, to be engaged in all conspiracies, royal interviews, and
remarkable occurrences: and hence Sir Wilfrid would certainly have
rescued the young Prince, had he been anywhere in the neighborhood of
Rouen, where the foul tragedy occurred. But he was a couple of hundred
leagues off, at Chalus, when the circumstance happened; tied down in his
bed as crazy as a Bedlamite, and raving ceaselessly in the Hebrew tongue
(which he had caught up during a previous illness in which he was tended
by a maiden of that nation) about a certain Rebecca Ben Isaacs, of whom,
being a married man, he never would have thought, had he been in his
sound senses. During this delirium, what were politics to him, or he to
politics? King John or King Arthur was entirely indifferent to a man
who announced to his nurse-tenders, the good hermits of Chalus before
mentioned, that he was the Marquis of Jericho, and about to marry
Rebecca the Queen of Sheba. In a word, he only heard of what had
occurred when he reached England, and his senses were restored to him.
Whether was he happier, sound of brain and entirely miserable, (as any
man would be who found so admirable a wife as Rowena married again,)
or perfectly crazy, the husband of the beautiful Rebecca? I don’t know
which he liked best.

Howbeit the conduct of King John inspired Sir Wilfrid with so thorough
a detestation of that sovereign, that he never could be brought to take
service under him; to get himself presented at St. James’s, or in any
way to acknowledge, but by stern acquiescence, the authority of the
sanguinary successor of his beloved King Richard. It was Sir Wilfrid of
Ivanhoe, I need scarcely say, who got the Barons of England to league
together and extort from the king that famous instrument and palladium
of our liberties at present in the British Museum, Great Russell Street,
Bloomsbury--the Magna Charta. His name does not naturally appear in the
list of Barons, because he was only a knight, and a knight in
disguise too: nor does Athelstane’s signature figure on that document.
Athelstane, in the first place, could not write; nor did he care a
pennypiece about politics, so long as he could drink his wine at home
undisturbed, and have his hunting and shooting in quiet.

It was not until the King wanted to interfere with the sport of every
gentleman in England (as we know by reference to the Historic Page that
this odious monarch did), that Athelstane broke out into open rebellion,
along with several Yorkshire squires and noblemen. It is recorded of the
King, that he forbade every man to hunt his own deer; and, in order to
secure an obedience to his orders, this Herod of a monarch wanted to
secure the eldest sons of all the nobility and gentry, as hostages for
the good behavior of their parents.

Athelstane was anxious about his game--Rowena was anxious about her
son. The former swore that he would hunt his deer in spite of all Norman
tyrants--the latter asked, should she give up her boy to the ruffian who
had murdered his own nephew?* The speeches of both were brought to
the King at York; and, furious, he ordered an instant attack upon
Rotherwood, and that the lord and lady of that castle should be brought
before him dead or alive.

     *See Hume, Giraldus Cambrensis, The Monk of Croyland, and
     Pinnock’s Catechism.

Ah, where was Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, the unconquerable champion, to defend
the castle against the royal party? A few thrusts from his lance would
have spitted the leading warriors of the King’s host: a few cuts from
his sword would have put John’s forces to rout. But the lance and sword
of Ivanhoe were idle on this occasion. “No, be hanged to me!” said the
knight, bitterly, “THIS is a quarrel in which I can’t interfere. Common
politeness forbids. Let yonder ale-swilling Athelstane defend his--ha,
ha--WIFE; and my Lady Rowena guard her--ha, ha, ha--SON.” And he laughed
wildly and madly; and the sarcastic, way in which he choked and gurgled
out the words “wife” and “son” would have made you shudder to hear.

When he heard, however, that, on the fourth day of the siege, Athelstane
had been slain by a cannon-ball, (and this time for good, and not to
come to life again as he had done before,) and that the widow (if so
the innocent bigamist may be called) was conducting the defence of
Rotherwood herself with the greatest intrepidity, showing herself upon
the walls with her little son, (who bellowed like a bull, and did
not like the fighting at all,) pointing the guns and encouraging the
garrison in every way--better feelings returned to the bosom of the
Knight of Ivanhoe, and summoning his men, he armed himself quickly and
determined to go forth to the rescue.

He rode without stopping for two days and two nights in the direction of
Rotherwood, with such swiftness and disregard for refreshment, indeed,
that his men dropped one by one upon the road, and he arrived alone at
the lodge-gate of the park. The windows were smashed; the door stove
in; the lodge, a neat little Swiss cottage, with a garden where the
pinafores of Mrs. Gurth’s children might have been seen hanging on the
gooseberry-bushes in more peaceful times, was now a ghastly heap
of smoking ruins: cottage, bushes, pinafores, children lay mangled
together, destroyed by the licentious soldiery of an infuriate monarch!
Far be it from me to excuse the disobedience of Athelstane and Rowena to
their sovereign; but surely, surely this cruelty might have been spared.

Gurth, who was lodge-keeper, was lying dreadfully wounded and expiring
at the flaming and violated threshold of his lately picturesque home. A
catapult and a couple of mangonels had done his business. The faithful
fellow, recognizing his master, who had put up his visor and forgotten
his wig and spectacles in the agitation of the moment, exclaimed, “Sir
Wilfrid! my dear master--praised be St. Waltheof--there may be yet
time--my beloved mistr--master Athelst . . .” He sank back, and never
spoke again.

Ivanhoe spurred on his horse Bavieca madly up the chestnut avenue. The
castle was before him; the western tower was in flames; the besiegers
were pressing at the southern gate; Athelstane’s banner, the bull
rampant, was still on the northern bartizan. “An Ivanhoe, an Ivanhoe!”
 he bellowed out, with a shout that overcame all the din of battle:
“Nostre Dame a la rescousse!” And to hurl his lance through the midriff
of Reginald de Bracy, who was commanding the assault--who fell howling
with anguish--to wave his battle-axe over his own head, and cut off
those of thirteen men-at-arms, was the work of an instant. “An Ivanhoe,
an Ivanhoe!” he still shouted, and down went a man as sure as he said
“hoe!”

“Ivanhoe! Ivanhoe!” a shrill voice cried from the top of the northern
bartizan. Ivanhoe knew it.

“Rowena my love, I come!” he roared on his part. “Villains! touch but a
hair of her head, and I . . .”

Here, with a sudden plunge and a squeal of agony, Bavieca sprang forward
wildly, and fell as wildly on her back, rolling over and over upon the
knight. All was dark before him; his brain reeled; it whizzed; something
came crashing down on his forehead. St. Waltheof and all the saints of
the Saxon calendar protect the knight! . . .

When he came to himself, Wamba and the lieutenant of his lances were
leaning over him with a bottle of the hermit’s elixir. “We arrived here
the day after the battle,” said the fool; “marry, I have a knack of
that.”

“Your worship rode so deucedly quick, there was no keeping up with your
worship,” said the lieutenant.

“The day--after--the bat--” groaned Ivanhoe. “Where is the Lady Rowena?”

“The castle has been taken and sacked,” the lieutenant said, and pointed
to what once WAS Rotherwood, but was now only a heap of smoking ruins.
Not a tower was left, not a roof, not a floor, not a single human being!
Everything was flame and ruin, smash and murther!

Of course Ivanhoe fell back fainting again among the ninety-seven
men-at-arms whom he had slain; and it was not until Wamba had applied
a second, and uncommonly strong dose of the elixir that he came to life
again. The good knight was, however, from long practice, so accustomed
to the severest wounds, that he bore them far more easily than common
folk, and thus was enabled to reach York upon a litter, which his men
constructed for him, with tolerable ease.

Rumor had as usual advanced before him; and he heard at the hotel where
he stopped, what had been the issue of the affair at Rotherwood. A
minute or two after his horse was stabbed, and Ivanhoe knocked down, the
western bartizan was taken by the storming-party which invested it, and
every soul slain, except Rowena and her boy; who were tied upon
horses and carried away, under a secure guard, to one of the King’s
castles--nobody knew whither: and Ivanhoe was recommended by the
hotel-keeper (whose house he had used in former times) to reassume his
wig and spectacles, and not call himself by his own name any more, lest
some of the King’s people should lay hands on him. However, as he had
killed everybody round about him, there was but little danger of his
discovery; and the Knight of the Spectacles, as he was called, went
about York quite unmolested, and at liberty to attend to his own
affairs.

We wish to be brief in narrating this part of the gallant hero’s
existence; for his life was one of feeling rather than affection, and
the description of mere sentiment is considered by many well-informed
persons to be tedious. What WERE his sentiments now, it may be asked,
under the peculiar position in which he found himself? He had done his
duty by Rowena, certainly: no man could say otherwise. But as for being
in love with her any more, after what had occurred, that was a different
question. Well, come what would, he was determined still to continue
doing his duty by her;--but as she was whisked away the deuce knew
whither, how could he do anything? So he resigned himself to the fact
that she was thus whisked away.

He, of course, sent emissaries about the country to endeavor to find out
where Rowena was: but these came back without any sort of intelligence;
and it was remarked, that he still remained in a perfect state of
resignation. He remained in this condition for a year, or more; and
it was said that he was becoming more cheerful, and he certainly was
growing rather fat. The Knight of the Spectacles was voted an agreeable
man in a grave way; and gave some very elegant, though quiet, parties,
and was received in the best society of York.

It was just at assize-time, the lawyers and barristers had arrived, and
the town was unusually gay; when, one morning, the attorney, whom we
have mentioned as Sir Wilfrid’s man of business, and a most respectable
man, called upon his gallant client at his lodgings, and said he had a
communication of importance to make. Having to communicate with a
client of rank, who was condemned to be hanged for forgery, Sir Roger
de Backbite, the attorney said, he had been to visit that party in the
condemned cell; and on the way through the yard, and through the bars of
another cell, had seen and recognized an old acquaintance of Sir Wilfrid
of Ivanhoe--and the lawyer held him out, with a particular look, a note,
written on a piece of whity-brown paper.

What were Ivanhoe’s sensations when he recognized the handwriting of
Rowena!--he tremblingly dashed open the billet, and read as follows:--


“MY DEAREST IVANHOE,--For I am thine now as erst, and my first love was
ever--ever dear to me. Have I been near thee dying for a whole year,
and didst thou make no effort to rescue thy Rowena? Have ye given to
others--I mention not their name nor their odious creed--the heart that
ought to be mine? I send thee my forgiveness from my dying pallet of
straw.--I forgive thee the insults I have received, the cold and hunger
I have endured, the failing health of my boy, the bitterness of my
prison, thy infatuation about that Jewess, which made our married life
miserable, and which caused thee, I am sure, to go abroad to look after
her. I forgive thee all my wrongs, and fain would bid thee farewell. Mr.
Smith hath gained over my gaoler--he will tell thee how I may see thee.
Come and console my last hour by promising that thou wilt care for my
boy--HIS boy who fell like a hero (when thou wert absent) combating by
the side of ROWENA.”


The reader may consult his own feelings, and say whether Ivanhoe was
likely to be pleased or not by this letter: however, he inquired of Mr.
Smith, the solicitor, what was the plan which that gentleman had devised
for the introduction to Lady Rowena, and was informed that he was to get
a barrister’s gown and wig, when the gaoler would introduce him into the
interior of the prison. These decorations, knowing several gentlemen of
the Northern Circuit, Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe easily procured, and with
feelings of no small trepidation, reached the cell, where, for the space
of a year, poor Rowena had been immured.

If any person have a doubt of the correctness, of the historical
exactness of this narrative, I refer him to the “Biographie Universelle”
 (article Jean sans Terre), which says, “La femme d’un baron auquel on
vint demander son fils, repondit, ‘Le roi pense-t-il que je confierai
mon fils a un homme qui a egorge son neveu de sa propre main?’ Jean
fit enlever la mere et l’enfant, et la laissa MOURIR DE FAIM dans les
cachots.”

I picture to myself, with a painful sympathy, Rowena undergoing this
disagreeable sentence. All her virtues, her resolution, her chaste
energy and perseverance, shine with redoubled lustre, and, for the first
time since the commencement of the history, I feel that I am partially
reconciled to her. The weary year passes--she grows weaker and more
languid, thinner and thinner! At length Ivanhoe, in the disguise of a
barrister of the Northern Circuit, is introduced to her cell, and finds
his lady in the last stage of exhaustion, on the straw of her dungeon,
with her little boy in her arms. She has preserved his life at the
expense of her own, giving him the whole of the pittance which her
gaolers allowed her, and perishing herself of inanition.

There is a scene! I feel as if I had made it up, as it were, with this
lady, and that we part in peace, in consequence of my providing her with
so sublime a death-bed. Fancy Ivanhoe’s entrance--their recognition--the
faint blush upon her worn features--the pathetic way in which she gives
little Cedric in charge to him, and his promises of protection.

“Wilfrid, my early loved,” slowly gasped she, removing her gray hair
from her furrowed temples, and gazing on her boy fondly, as he nestled
on Ivanhoe’s knee--“promise me, by St. Waltheof of Templestowe--promise
me one boon!”

“I do,” said Ivanhoe, clasping the boy, and thinking it was to that
little innocent the promise was intended to apply.

“By St. Waltheof?”

“By St. Waltheof!”

“Promise me, then,” gasped Rowena, staring wildly at him, “that you
never will marry a Jewess?”

“By St. Waltheof,” cried Ivanhoe, “this is too much, Rowena!”--But he
felt his hand grasped for a moment, the nerves then relaxed, the pale
lips ceased to quiver--she was no more!


CHAPTER VI.

IVANHOE THE WIDOWER.


Having placed young Cedric at school at the hall of Dotheboyes, in
Yorkshire, and arranged his family affairs, Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe
quitted a country which had no longer any charms for him, and in which
his stay was rendered the less agreeable by the notion that King John
would hang him, if ever he could lay hands on the faithful follower of
King Richard and Prince Arthur.

But there was always in those days a home and occupation for a brave and
pious knight. A saddle on a gallant war-horse, a pitched field against
the Moors, a lance wherewith to spit a turbaned infidel, or a road
to Paradise carved out by his scimitar,--these were the height of the
ambition of good and religious warriors; and so renowned a champion as
Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe was sure to be well received wherever blows were
stricken for the cause of Christendom. Even among the dark Templars,
he who had twice overcome the most famous lance of their Order was a
respected though not a welcome guest: but among the opposition company
of the Knights of St. John, he was admired and courted beyond measure;
and always affectioning that Order, which offered him, indeed, its first
rank and commanderies, he did much good service; fighting in their ranks
for the glory of heaven and St. Waltheof, and slaying many thousands of
the heathen in Prussia, Poland, and those savage Northern countries. The
only fault that the great and gallant, though severe and ascetic Folko
of Heydenbraten, the chief of the Order of St. John, found with the
melancholy warrior, whose lance did such good service to the cause, was,
that he did not persecute the Jews as so religious a knight should. He
let off sundry captives of that persuasion whom he had taken with his
sword and his spear, saved others from torture, and actually ransomed
the two last grinders of a venerable rabbi (that Roger de Cartright,
an English knight of the Order, was about to extort from the elderly
Israelite,) with a hundred crowns and a gimmal ring, which were all the
property he possessed. Whenever he so ransomed or benefited one of this
religion, he would moreover give them a little token or a message (were
the good knight out of money), saying, “Take this token, and remember
this deed was done by Wilfrid the Disinherited, for the services whilome
rendered to him by Rebecca, the daughter of Isaac of York!” So among
themselves, and in their meetings and synagogues, and in their restless
travels from land to land, when they of Jewry cursed and reviled all
Christians, as such abominable heathens will, they nevertheless excepted
the name of the Desdichado, or the doubly-disinherited as he now was,
the Desdichado-Doblado.

The account of all the battles, storms, and scaladoes in which Sir
Wilfrid took part, would only weary the reader; for the chopping off
one heathen’s head with an axe must be very like the decapitation of any
other unbeliever. Suffice it to say, that wherever this kind of work was
to be done, and Sir Wilfrid was in the way, he was the man to perform
it. It would astonish you were you to see the account that Wamba kept of
his master’s achievements, and of the Bulgarians, Bohemians, Croatians,
slain or maimed by his hand. And as, in those days, a reputation for
valor had an immense effect upon the soft hearts of women, and even
the ugliest man, were he a stout warrior, was looked upon with favor by
Beauty: so Ivanhoe, who was by no means ill-favored, though now becoming
rather elderly, made conquests over female breasts as well as over
Saracens, and had more than one direct offer of marriage made to him
by princesses, countesses, and noble ladies possessing both charms and
money, which they were anxious to place at the disposal of a champion so
renowned. It is related that the Duchess Regent of Kartoffelberg offered
him her hand, and the ducal crown of Kartoffelberg, which he had rescued
from the unbelieving Prussians; but Ivanhoe evaded the Duchess’s offer,
by riding away from her capital secretly at midnight and hiding himself
in a convent of Knights Hospitallers on the borders of Poland. And it
is a fact that the Princess Rosalia Seraphina of Pumpernickel, the most
lovely woman of her time, became so frantically attached to him, that
she followed him on a campaign, and was discovered with his baggage
disguised as a horse-boy. But no princess, no beauty, no female
blandishments had any charms for Ivanhoe: no hermit practised a more
austere celibacy. The severity of his morals contrasted so remarkably
with the lax and dissolute manner of the young lords and nobles in the
courts which he frequented, that these young springalds would sometimes
sneer and call him Monk and Milksop; but his courage in the day of
battle was so terrible and admirable, that I promise you the youthful
libertines did not sneer THEN; and the most reckless of them often
turned pale when they couched their lances to follow Ivanhoe. Holy
Waltheof! it was an awful sight to see him with his pale calm face, his
shield upon his breast, his heavy lance before him, charging a squadron
of heathen Bohemians, or a regiment of Cossacks! Wherever he saw the
enemy, Ivanhoe assaulted him: and when people remonstrated with him, and
said if he attacked such and such a post, breach, castle, or army,
he would be slain, “And suppose I be?” he answered, giving them
to understand that he would as lief the Battle of Life were over
altogether.


While he was thus making war against the Northern infidels news was
carried all over Christendom of a catastrophe which had befallen the
good cause in the South of Europe, where the Spanish Christians had met
with such a defeat and massacre at the hands of the Moors as had never
been known in the proudest day of Saladin.

Thursday, the 9th of Shaban, in the 605th year of the Hejira, is known
all over the West as the amun-al-ark, the year of the battle of Alarcos,
gained over the Christians by the Moslems of Andaluz, on which fatal day
Christendom suffered a defeat so signal, that it was feared the Spanish
peninsula would be entirely wrested away from the dominion of the
Cross. On that day the Franks lost 150,000 men and 30,000 prisoners.
A man-slave sold among the unbelievers for a dirhem; a donkey for
the same; a sword, half a dirhem; a horse, five dirhems. Hundreds of
thousands of these various sorts of booty were in the possession of the
triumphant followers of Yakoobal-Mansoor. Curses on his head! But he
was a brave warrior, and the Christians before him seemed to forget
that they were the descendants of the brave Cid, the Kanbitoor, as the
Moorish hounds (in their jargon) denominated the famous Campeador.

A general move for the rescue of the faithful in Spain--a crusade
against the infidels triumphing there, was preached throughout Europe
by all the most eloquent clergy; and thousands and thousands of valorous
knights and nobles, accompanied by well-meaning varlets and vassals of
the lower sort, trooped from all sides to the rescue. The Straits of
Gibel-al-Tariff, at which spot the Moor, passing from Barbary, first
planted his accursed foot on the Christian soil, were crowded with the
galleys of the Templars and the Knights of St. John, who flung succors
into the menaced kingdoms of the peninsula; the inland sea swarmed
with their ships hasting from their forts and islands, from Rhodes and
Byzantium, from Jaffa and Ascalon. The Pyrenean peaks beheld the pennons
and glittered with the armor of the knights marching out of France into
Spain; and, finally, in a ship that set sail direct from Bohemia, where
Sir Wilfrid happened to be quartered at the time when the news of the
defeat of Alarcos came and alarmed all good Christians, Ivanhoe landed
at Barcelona, and proceeded to slaughter the Moors forthwith.

He brought letters of introduction from his friend Folko of
Heydenbraten, the Grand Master of the Knights of Saint John, to the
venerable Baldomero de Garbanzos, Grand Master of the renowned order of
Saint Jago. The chief of Saint Jago’s knights paid the greatest respect
to a warrior whose fame was already so widely known in Christendom; and
Ivanhoe had the pleasure of being appointed to all the posts of danger
and forlorn hopes that could be devised in his honor. He would be called
up twice or thrice in a night to fight the Moors: he led ambushes,
scaled breaches, was blown up by mines; was wounded many hundred times
(recovering, thanks to the elixir, of which Wamba always carried a
supply); he was the terror of the Saracens, and the admiration and
wonder of the Christians.

To describe his deeds, would, I say, be tedious; one day’s battle was
like that of another. I am not writing in ten volumes like Monsieur
Alexandre Dumas, or even in three like other great authors. We have no
room for the recounting of Sir Wilfrid’s deeds of valor. Whenever he
took a Moorish town, it was remarked, that he went anxiously into the
Jewish quarter, and inquired amongst the Hebrews, who were in great
numbers in Spain, for Rebecca, the daughter of Isaac. Many Jews,
according to his wont, he ransomed, and created so much scandal by this
proceeding, and by the manifest favor which he showed to the people of
that nation, that the Master of Saint Jago remonstrated with him, and
it is probable he would have been cast into the Inquisition and
roasted, but that his prodigious valor and success against the Moors
counterbalanced his heretical partiality for the children of Jacob.

It chanced that the good knight was present at the siege of Xixona
in Andalusia, entering the breach first, according to his wont, and
slaying, with his own hand, the Moorish lieutenant of the town, and
several hundred more of its unbelieving defenders. He had very nearly
done for the Alfaqui, or governor--a veteran warrior with a crooked
scimitar and a beard as white as snow--but a couple of hundred of the
Alfaqui’s bodyguard flung themselves between Ivanhoe and their chief,
and the old fellow escaped with his life, leaving a handful of his beard
in the grasp of the English knight. The strictly military business being
done, and such of the garrison as did not escape put, as by right, to
the sword, the good knight, Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe, took no further part
in the proceedings of the conquerors of that ill-fated place. A scene
of horrible massacre and frightful reprisals ensued, and the Christian
warriors, hot with victory and flushed with slaughter, were, it is to be
feared, as savage in their hour of triumph as ever their heathen enemies
had been.

Among the most violent and least scrupulous was the ferocious Knight of
Saint Jago, Don Beltran de Cuchilla y Trabuco y Espada y Espelon.
Raging through the vanquished city like a demon, he slaughtered
indiscriminately all those infidels of both sexes whose wealth did not
tempt him to a ransom, or whose beauty did not reserve them for more
frightful calamities than death. The slaughter over, Don Beltran took
up his quarters in the Albaycen, where the Alfaqui had lived who had so
narrowly escaped the sword of Ivanhoe; but the wealth, the treasure,
the slaves, and the family of the fugitive chieftain, were left in
possession of the conqueror of Xixona. Among the treasures, Don Beltran
recognized with a savage joy the coat-armors and ornaments of many brave
and unfortunate companions-in-arms who had fallen in the fatal battle
of Alarcos. The sight of those bloody relics added fury to his cruel
disposition, and served to steel a heart already but little disposed to
sentiments of mercy.

Three days after the sack and plunder of the place, Don Beltran was
seated in the hall-court lately occupied by the proud Alfaqui, lying
in his divan, dressed in his rich robes, the fountains playing in the
centre, the slaves of the Moor ministering to his scarred and rugged
Christian conqueror. Some fanned him with peacocks’ pinions, some danced
before him, some sang Moor’s melodies to the plaintive notes of a guzla,
one--it was the only daughter of the Moor’s old age, the young Zutulbe,
a rosebud of beauty--sat weeping in a corner of the gilded hall: weeping
for her slain brethren, the pride of Moslem chivalry, whose heads were
blackening in the blazing sunshine on the portals without, and for her
father, whose home had been thus made desolate.

He and his guest, the English knight Sir Wilfrid, were playing at chess,
a favorite amusement with the chivalry of the period, when a messenger
was announced from Valencia, to treat, if possible, for the ransom of
the remaining part of the Alfaqui’s family. A grim smile lighted up Don
Beltran’s features as he bade the black slave admit the messenger. He
entered. By his costume it was at once seen that the bearer of the
flag of truce was a Jew--the people were employed continually then as
ambassadors between the two races at war in Spain.

“I come,” said the old Jew (in a voice which made Sir Wilfrid start),
“from my lord the Alfaqui to my noble senor, the invincible Don Beltran
de Cuchilla, to treat for the ransom of the Moor’s only daughter, the
child of his old age and the pearl of his affection.”

“A pearl is a valuable jewel, Hebrew. What does the Moorish dog bid for
her?” asked Don Beltran, still smiling grimly.

“The Alfaqui offers 100,000 dinars, twenty-four horses with their
caparisons, twenty-four suits of plate-armor, and diamonds and rubies to
the amount of 1,000,000 dinars.”

“Ho, slaves!” roared Don Beltran, “show the Jew my treasury of gold. How
many hundred thousand pieces are there?” And ten enormous chests were
produced in which the accountant counted 1,000 bags of 1,000 dirhems
each, and displayed several caskets of jewels containing such a treasure
of rubies, smaragds, diamonds, and jacinths, as made the eyes of the
aged ambassador twinkle with avarice.

“How many horses are there in my stable?” continued Don Beltran;
and Muley, the master of the horse, numbered three hundred fully
caparisoned; and there was, likewise, armor of the richest sort for as
many cavaliers, who followed the banner of this doughty captain.

“I want neither money nor armor,” said the ferocious knight; “tell this
to the Alfaqui, Jew. And I will keep the child, his daughter, to serve
the messes for my dogs, and clean the platters for my scullions.”

“Deprive not the old man of his child,” here interposed the Knight
of Ivanhoe; “bethink thee, brave Don Beltran, she is but an infant in
years.”

“She is my captive, Sir Knight,” replied the surly Don Beltran; “I will
do with my own as becomes me.”

“Take 200,000 dirhems,” cried the Jew; “more!--anything! The Alfaqui
will give his life for his child!”

“Come hither, Zutulbe!--come hither, thou Moorish pearl!” yelled
the ferocious warrior; “come closer, my pretty black-eyed houri of
heathenesse! Hast heard the name of Beltran de Espada y Trabuco?”

“There were three brothers of that name at Alarcos, and my brothers slew
the Christian dogs!” said the proud young girl, looking boldly at Don
Beltran, who foamed with rage.

“The Moors butchered my mother and her little ones, at midnight, in our
castle of Murcia,” Beltran said.

“Thy father fled like a craven, as thou didst, Don Beltran!” cried the
high-spirited girl.

“By Saint Jago, this is too much!” screamed the infuriated nobleman; and
the next moment there was a shriek, and the maiden fell to the ground
with Don Beltran’s dagger in her side.

“Death is better than dishonor!” cried the child, rolling on the
blood-stained marble pavement. “I--I spit upon thee, dog of a
Christian!” and with this, and with a savage laugh, she fell back and
died.

“Bear back this news, Jew, to the Alfaqui,” howled the Don, spurning the
beauteous corpse with his foot. “I would not have ransomed her for all
the gold in Barbary!” And shuddering, the old Jew left the apartment,
which Ivanhoe quitted likewise.

When they were in the outer court, the knight said to the Jew, “Isaac of
York, dost thou not know me?” and threw back his hood, and looked at the
old man.

The old Jew stared wildly, rushed forward as if to seize his hand, then
started back, trembling convulsively, and clutching his withered
hands over his face, said, with a burst of grief, “Sir Wilfrid of
Ivanhoe!--no, no!--I do not know thee!”

“Holy mother! what has chanced?” said Ivanhoe, in his turn becoming
ghastly pale; “where is thy daughter--where is Rebecca?”

“Away from me!” said the old Jew, tottering. “Away Rebecca is--dead!”

*****

When the Disinherited Knight heard that fatal announcement, he fell to
the ground senseless, and was for some days as one perfectly distraught
with grief. He took no nourishment and uttered no word. For weeks he
did not relapse out of his moody silence, and when he came partially to
himself again, it was to bid his people to horse, in a hollow voice, and
to make a foray against the Moors. Day after day he issued out against
these infidels, and did nought but slay and slay. He took no plunder
as other knights did, but left that to his followers; he uttered no
war-cry, as was the manner of chivalry, and he gave no quarter, insomuch
that the “silent knight” became the dread of all the Paynims of Granada
and Andalusia, and more fell by his lance than by that of any the most
clamorous captains of the troops in arms against them. Thus the tide of
battle turned, and the Arab historian, El Makary, recounts how, at
the great battle of Al Akab, called by the Spaniards Las Navas, the
Christians retrieved their defeat at Alarcos, and absolutely killed
half a milllion of Mahometans. Fifty thousand of these, of course, Don
Wilfrid took to his own lance; and it was remarked that the melancholy
warrior seemed somewhat more easy in spirits after that famous feat of
arms.


CHAPTER VII.

THE END OF THE PERFORMANCE.


In a short time the terrible Sir Wilfrid of Ivanhoe had killed off
so many of the Moors, that though those unbelieving miscreants poured
continual reinforcements into Spain from Barbary, they could make no
head against the Christian forces, and in fact came into battle quite
discouraged at the notion of meeting the dreadful silent knight. It was
commonly believed amongst them, that the famous Malek Ric, Richard
of England, the conqueror of Saladin, had come to life again, and was
battling in the Spanish hosts--that this, his second life, was a
charmed one, and his body inaccessible to blow of scimitar or thrust of
spear--that after battle he ate the hearts and drank the blood of
many young Moors for his supper: a thousand wild legends were told of
Ivanhoe, indeed, so that the Morisco warriors came half vanquished into
the field, and fell an easy prey to the Spaniards, who cut away among
them without mercy. And although none of the Spanish historians whom
I have consulted make mention of Sir Wilfrid as the real author of the
numerous triumphs which now graced the arms of the good cause, this is
not in the least to be wondered at, in a nation that has always been
notorious for bragging, and for the non-payment of their debts of
gratitude as of their other obligations, and that writes histories
of the Peninsular war with the Emperor Napoleon, without making the
slightest mention of his Grace the Duke of Wellington, or of the part
taken by BRITISH VALOR in that transaction. Well, it must be confessed,
on the other hand, that we brag enough of our fathers’ feats in those
campaigns: but this is not the subject at present under consideration.

To be brief, Ivanhoe made such short work with the unbelievers, that
the monarch of Aragon, King Don Jayme, saw himself speedily enabled to
besiege the city of Valencia, the last stronghold which the Moors had in
his dominions, and garrisoned by many thousands of those infidels
under the command of their King Aboo Abdallah Mahommed, son of
Yakoobal-Mansoor. The Arabian historian El Makary gives a full account
of the military precautions taken by Aboo Abdallah to defend his city;
but as I do not wish to make a parade of my learning, or to write a
costume novel, I shall pretermit any description of the city under its
Moorish governors.

Besides the Turks who inhabited it, there dwelt within its walls great
store of those of the Hebrew nation, who were always protected by the
Moors during their unbelieving reign in Spain; and who were, as we very
well know, the chief physicians, the chief bankers, the chief statesmen,
the chief artists and musicians, the chief everything, under the Moorish
kings. Thus it is not surprising that the Hebrews, having their money,
their liberty, their teeth, their lives, secure under the Mahometan
domination, should infinitely prefer it to the Christian sway; beneath
which they were liable to be deprived of every one of these benefits.

Among these Hebrews of Valencia, lived a very ancient Israelite--no
other than Isaac of York before mentioned, who came into Spain with
his daughter, soon after Ivanhoe’s marriage, in the third volume of the
first part of this history. Isaac was respected by his people for
the money which he possessed, and his daughter for her admirable good
qualities, her beauty, her charities, and her remarkable medical skill.

The young Emir Aboo Abdallah was so struck by her charms, that though
she was considerably older than his Highness, he offered to marry her,
and install her as Number 1 of his wives; and Isaac of York would not
have objected to the union, (for such mixed marriages were not uncommon
between the Hebrews and Moors in those days,) but Rebecca firmly yet
respectfully declined the proposals of the prince, saying that it was
impossible she should unite herself with a man of a creed different to
her own.

Although Isaac was, probably, not over-well pleased at losing this
chance of being father-in-law to a royal highness, yet as he passed
among his people for a very strict character, and there were in his
family several rabbis of great reputation and severity of conduct, the
old gentleman was silenced by this objection of Rebecca’s, and the young
lady herself applauded by her relatives for her resolute behavior. She
took their congratulations in a very frigid manner, and said that it was
her wish not to marry at all, but to devote herself to the practice of
medicine altogether, and to helping the sick and needy of her people.
Indeed, although she did not go to any public meetings, she was as
benevolent a creature as the world ever saw: the poor blessed her
wherever they knew her, and many benefited by her who guessed not whence
her gentle bounty came.

But there are men in Jewry who admire beauty, and, as I have even heard,
appreciate money too, and Rebecca had such a quantity of both, that all
the most desirable bachelors of the people were ready to bid for her.
Ambassadors came from all quarters to propose for her. Her own uncle,
the venerable Ben Solomons, with a beard as long as a cashmere goat’s,
and a reputation for learning and piety which still lives in his nation,
quarrelled with his son Moses, the red-haired diamond-merchant of
Trebizond, and his son Simeon, the bald bill-broker of Bagdad, each
putting in a claim for their cousin. Ben Minories came from London
and knelt at her feet; Ben Jochanan arrived from Paris, and thought to
dazzle her with the latest waistcoats from the Palais Royal; and Ben
Jonah brought her a present of Dutch herrings, and besought her to come
back and be Mrs. Ben Jonah at the Hague.

Rebecca temporized as best she might. She thought her uncle was too old.
She besought dear Moses and dear Simeon not to quarrel with each other,
and offend their father by pressing their suit. Ben Minories from
London, she said, was too young, and Jochanan from Paris, she pointed
out to Isaac of York, must be a spendthrift, or he would not wear those
absurd waistcoats. As for Ben Jonah, she said, she could not bear the
notion of tobacco and Dutch herrings: she wished to stay with her papa,
her dear papa. In fine, she invented a thousand excuses for delay, and
it was plain that marriage was odious to her. The only man whom she
received with anything like favor, was young Bevis Marks of London, with
whom she was very familiar. But Bevis had come to her with a certain
token that had been given to him by an English knight, who saved him
from a fagot to which the ferocious Hospitaller Folko of Heydenbraten
was about to condemn him. It was but a ring, with an emerald in it, that
Bevis knew to be sham, and not worth a groat. Rebecca knew about the
value of jewels too; but ah! she valued this one more than all the
diamonds in Prester John’s turban. She kissed it; she cried over it;
she wore it in her bosom always and when she knelt down at night and
morning, she held it between her folded hands on her neck. . . . Young
Bevis Marks went away finally no better off than the others; the rascal
sold to the King of France a handsome ruby, the very size of the bit of
glass in Rebecca’s ring; but he always said he would rather have had her
than ten thousand pounds: and very likely he would, for it was known she
would at once have a plum to her fortune.

These delays, however, could not continue for ever; and at a great
family meeting held at Passover-time, Rebecca was solemnly ordered to
choose a husband out of the gentlemen there present; her aunts pointing
out the great kindness which had been shown to her by her father,
in permitting her to choose for herself. One aunt was of the Solomon
faction, another aunt took Simeon’s side, a third most venerable old
lady--the head of the family, and a hundred and forty-four years of
age--was ready to pronounce a curse upon her, and cast her out, unless
she married before the month was over. All the jewelled heads of all the
old ladies in council, all the beards of all the family, wagged against
her: it must have been an awful sight to witness.

At last, then, Rebecca was forced to speak. “Kinsmen!” she said, turning
pale, “when the Prince Abou Abdil asked me in marriage, I told you I
would not wed but with one of my own faith.”

“She has turned Turk,” screamed out the ladies. “She wants to be a
princess, and has turned Turk,” roared the rabbis.

“Well, well,” said Isaac, in rather an appeased tone, “let us hear what
the poor girl has got to say. Do you want to marry his royal highness,
Rebecca? Say the word, yes or no.”

Another groan burst from the rabbis--they cried, shrieked, chattered,
gesticulated, furious to lose such a prize; as were the women, that she
should reign over them a second Esther.

“Silence,” cried out Isaac; “let the girl speak. Speak boldly, Rebecca
dear, there’s a good girl.”

Rebecca was as pale as a stone. She folded her arms on her breast, and
felt the ring there. She looked round all the assembly, and then at
Isaac. “Father,” she said, in a thrilling low steady voice, “I am not of
your religion--I am not of the Prince Boabdil’s religion--I--I am of HIS
religion.”

“His! whose, in the name of Moses, girl?” cried Isaac.

Rebecca clasped her hands on her beating chest and looked round with
dauntless eyes. “Of his,” she said, “who saved my life and your honor:
of my dear, dear champion’s. I never can be his, but I will be no
other’s. Give my money to my kinsmen; it is that they long for. Take the
dross, Simeon and Solomon, Jonah and Jochanan, and divide it among you,
and leave me. I will never be yours, I tell you, never. Do you think,
after knowing him and hearing him speak,--after watching him wounded on
his pillow, and glorious in battle” (her eyes melted and kindled again
as she spoke these words), “I can mate with such as you? Go. Leave me
to myself. I am none of yours. I love him--I love him. Fate divides
us--long, long miles separate us; and I know we may never meet again.
But I love and bless him always. Yes, always. My prayers are his; my
faith is his. Yes, my faith is your faith, Wilfrid--Wilfrid! I have no
kindred more,--I am a Christian!”

At this last word there was such a row in the assembly, as my feeble pen
would in vain endeavor to depict. Old Isaac staggered back in a fit,
and nobody took the least notice of him. Groans, curses, yells of men,
shrieks of women, filled the room with such a furious jabbering, as
might have appalled any heart less stout than Rebecca’s; but that brave
woman was prepared for all; expecting, and perhaps hoping, that death
would be her instant lot. There was but one creature who pitied her, and
that was her cousin and father’s clerk, little Ben Davids, who was but
thirteen, and had only just begun to carry a bag, and whose crying and
boo-hooing, as she finished speaking, was drowned in the screams and
maledictions of the elder Israelites. Ben Davids was madly in love with
his cousin (as boys often are with ladies of twice their age), and he
had presence of mind suddenly to knock over the large brazen lamp on the
table, which illuminated the angry conclave; then, whispering to Rebecca
to go up to her own room and lock herself in, or they would kill her
else, he took her hand and led her out.

From that day she disappeared from among her people. The poor and the
wretched missed her, and asked for her in vain. Had any violence been
done to her, the poorer Jews would have risen and put all Isaac’s family
to death; and besides, her old flame, Prince Boabdil, would have also
been exceedingly wrathful. She was not killed then, but, so to speak,
buried alive, and locked up in Isaac’s back-kitchen: an apartment into
which scarcely any light entered, and where she was fed upon scanty
portions of the most mouldy bread and water. Little Ben Davids was the
only person who visited her, and her sole consolation was to talk to
him about Ivanhoe, and how good and how gentle he was; how brave and how
true; and how he slew the tremendous knight of the Templars, and how
he married a lady whom Rebecca scarcely thought worthy of him, but with
whom she prayed he might be happy; and of what color his eyes were, and
what were the arms on his shield--viz, a tree with the word “Desdichado”
 written underneath, &c. &c. &c.: all which talk would not have
interested little Davids, had it come from anybody else’s mouth, but to
which he never tired of listening as it fell from her sweet lips.

So, in fact, when old Isaac of York came to negotiate with Don Beltran
de Cuchilla for the ransom of the Alfaqui’s daughter of Xixona, our
dearest Rebecca was no more dead than you and I; and it was in his rage
and fury against Ivanhoe that Isaac told that cavalier the falsehood
which caused the knight so much pain and such a prodigious deal of
bloodshed to the Moors: and who knows, trivial as it may seem, whether
it was not that very circumstance which caused the destruction in Spain
of the Moorish power?

Although Isaac, we may be sure, never told his daughter that Ivanhoe
had cast up again, yet Master Ben Davids did, who heard it from his
employer; and he saved Rebecca’s life by communicating the intelligence,
for the poor thing would have infallibly perished but for this good
news. She had now been in prison four years three months and twenty-four
days, during which time she had partaken of nothing but bread and water
(except such occasional tit-bits as Davids could bring her--and these
were few indeed; for old Isaac was always a curmudgeon, and seldom had
more than a pair of eggs for his own and Davids’ dinner); and she was
languishing away, when the news came suddenly to revive her. Then,
though in the darkness you could not see her cheeks, they began to
bloom again: then her heart began to beat and her blood to flow, and
she kissed the ring on her neck a thousand times a day at least; and
her constant question was, “Ben Davids! Ben Davids! when is he coming to
besiege Valencia?” She knew he would come: and, indeed, the Christians
were encamped before the town ere a month was over.

*****

And now, my dear boys and girls, I think I perceive behind that
dark scene of the back-kitchen (which is just a simple flat, painted
stone-color, that shifts in a minute,) bright streaks of light flashing
out, as though they were preparing a most brilliant, gorgeous, and
altogether dazzling illumination, with effects never before attempted on
any stage. Yes, the fairy in the pretty pink tights and spangled
muslin is getting into the brilliant revolving chariot of the realms of
bliss.--Yes, most of the fiddlers and trumpeters have gone round from
the orchestra to join in the grand triumphal procession, where the whole
strength of the company is already assembled, arrayed in costumes of
Moorish and Christian chivalry, to celebrate the “Terrible Escalade,”
 the “Rescue of Virtuous Innocence”--the “Grand Entry of the Christians
into Valencia”--“Appearance of the Fairy Day-Star,” and “Unexampled
displays of pyrotechnic festivity.” Do you not, I say, perceive that we
are come to the end of our history; and, after a quantity of rapid and
terrific fighting, brilliant change of scenery, and songs, appropriate
or otherwise, are bringing our hero and heroine together? Who wants a
long scene at the last? Mammas are putting the girls’ cloaks and boas
on; papas have gone out to look for the carriage, and left the
box-door swinging open, and letting in the cold air: if there WERE any
stage-conversation, you could not hear it, for the scuffling of the
people who are leaving the pit. See, the orange-women are preparing to
retire. To-morrow their play-bills will be as so much waste-paper--so
will some of our masterpieces, woe is me: but lo! here we come to Scene
the last, and Valencia is besieged and captured by the Christians.


Who is the first on the wall, and who hurls down the green standard of
the Prophet? Who chops off the head of the Emir Aboo What-d’ye-call’im,
just as the latter has cut over the cruel Don Beltran de Cuchillay &c.?
Who, attracted to the Jewish quarter by the shrieks of the inhabitants
who are being slain by the Moorish soldiery, and by a little boy by the
name of Ben Davids, who recognizes the knight by his shield, finds Isaac
of York egorge on a threshold, and clasping a large back-kitchen key?
Who but Ivanhoe--who but Wilfrid? “An Ivanhoe to the rescue,” he bellows
out; he has heard that news from little Ben Davids which makes him sing.
And who is it that comes out of the house--trembling--panting--with
her arms out--in a white dress--with her hair down--who is it but dear
Rebecca? Look, they rush together, and Master Wamba is waving an immense
banner over them, and knocks down a circumambient Jew with a ham, which
he happens to have in his pocket. . . . As for Rebecca, now her head
is laid upon Ivanhoe’s heart, I shall not ask to hear what she is
whispering, or describe further that scene of meeting; though I declare
I am quite affected when I think of it. Indeed I have thought of it
any time these five-and-twenty years--ever since, as a boy at school, I
commenced the noble study of novels--ever since the day when, lying on
sunny slopes of half-holidays, the fair chivalrous figures and beautiful
shapes of knights and ladies were visible to me--ever since I grew to
love Rebecca, that sweetest creature of the poet’s fancy, and longed to
see her righted.

That she and Ivanhoe were married, follows of course; for Rowena’s
promise extorted from him was, that he would never wed a Jewess, and a
better Christian than Rebecca now was never said her catechism. Married
I am sure they were, and adopted little Cedric; but I don’t think they
had any other children, or were subsequently very boisterously happy. Of
some sort of happiness melancholy is a characteristic, and I think these
were a solemn pair, and died rather early.
